In view of your remarks, Mr. President, I am a little embarrassed but I would like to extend to you my congratulations and best wishes as you assume your important duties as President of the current session of the General Assembly. The wisdom and the understanding that you bring to this position is well suited to these historic times. I am also confident you will do great honour to the legacy left by your predecessor and my good friend, Dante Caputo. Before beginning my main remarks I want to comment on two particular developments of relevance to the United Nations. The first concerns the application of modern technology to the challenge of peace-keeping, in April of this year, Canada completed a comprehensive study the purpose of which was to explore the utility of all forms of aerial surveillance to the peace-keeping tasks now before the international community. The conclusion of this study was that these overhead technologies - satellite or airborne - could significantly increase the efficiency of peace-keeping operations and related verification endeavours. This study will be submitted to the United Nations for its consideration.
 I believe this is an important development both symbolically and as an achievement in its own right. It is the sort of pragmatic, concrete work necessary to allow the United Nations to handle its ever-expanding peace-keeping responsibilities more effectively, it also symbolizes one of the fundamental purposes of this Organization: harmonizing the wonders of modern technology to the tasks of peace-making and not war-making.
The second development on which I would like to comment is the readiness by Canada, if asked, to supplement the United Nations presence in Namibia by sending trained and respected police forces. Canada enthusiastically supported the idea that nations should help meet the urgent requirements for skilled policing in Namibia. We are ready to send members of our national force, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, who have played such a decisive and constructive role in our own history.
They were, in effect, Canada's first peace-keepers, in 1874, in one of the actions which made us a trans-continental nation, the North-west Mounted Police marched west across 1,000 miles to establish by their presence the rule of law in the Canadian west. They brought order, not force, and by their conduct established a respect that endures to this day and has made them one of the most admired police forces in the world. They would carry to Namibia not only their skills, hut their reputation as keepers of the peace.
This would be the first time in Canadian history that the Royal Canadian Mounted Police has undertaken such a role and in order to be ready, their Commissioner has asked for 100 volunteers. So far, 2,000 members have responded to that call from a total force of over 14,000. We believe that Canadian Mounties, Who, more than a century ago, brought a universal respect for law and order to our own West can extend that tradition to Namibia, as that new nation finally comes of age. This is an unprecedented and challenging period in world affairs. On the one hand, there is real movement on problems that not long ago seemed intractable. That is true in southern Africa, in Indo-China, in parts of the Middle East and, most dramatically, in East-West relations.
At the same time, the sense of crisis becomes more acute. Our climate is changing, bringing drought or inundation or other threats to our very survival. New diseases develop. New technologies allow proliferation of the most deadly weapons. Terrorism becomes more widespread. What is common about these problems is that none of them can be solved by one nation acting alone, nor by one group of powerful nations combining their will.
In the past, we assumed the world could survive man's worst excesses. Now in an age of suitcase bombs, the AIDS pandemic, holes in the ozone layer, there is doubt about that elementary ability to survive. There is doubt, but not despair -indeed the opposite of despair, what marks this period in world affairs is an activism and a pragmatism which yield surprising results and they come together here in the United Nations.
We are entering an era where the words of the United Nations Charter must cease to be goals to which we aspire, they must become descriptions of our common actions. And the term 'United Nations' cannot simply be the name of our institution, it must become a statement of our common purpose.
Who, today, can imagine a nuclear war in which there are winners and losers? Who can envisage a conventional war in Europe which does not consume the prize? Who can construct a solution to the debt crisis which does not involve compromise? Mho can foresee a cleaner global environment without international co-operation and joint action? And who can imagine a resolution of the many crises in the developing world without a reasoned and productive dialogue with the developed world? In the past it was the adherents of unilateralism who were known as realists and the advocates of co-operation who were labelled idealists. I submit that the reverse is now the case. Co-operation is now the new realism and pragmatism is the path to progress. 
Much has been accomplished in recent months and years, much more remains to be done. Within the East-West relationship there is a new  willingness to abandon sterile linkages and to seek solutions to tractable problems even when other areas remain contentious. This welcome attitude has invigorated this institution and brought hope to many conflicts and regions of the world. We encourage its continuance.
Arms control is now characterized by real compromise and give and take. Problems which are truly acute are being addressed first. Areas where technology threatens to overtake politics are being given priority and the unnecessarily large and undesirably unstable balance in conventional forces is finally being dealt with head-on. Canada warmly welcomes the significant progress made in recent days by the United States and the Soviet Union on a variety of fundamental issues. In particular, movement towards the abandonment of the linkage between research on strategic defence and progress on strategic nuclear arms control is a very positive development. So too is the progress registered on eliminating chemical weapons, including the exchange of data on stocks. We strongly welcome President Bush's offer to reduce stockpiles to less than 20 per cent of current levels while efforts continue in Geneva to negotiate a chemical weapons convention.
Canada endorses also the United States and Soviet agreement to explore an open-skies arrangement between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact. Such an arrangement would be daring in its simplicity, yet path-breaking in its consequences: an agreement that the aircraft of each member of both alliances could enter the airspace of the other alliance subject only to basic air-safety regulations. That would increase the assurance of every member that military activities were not becoming preparations for surprise attack.
From the beginning, we have urged the United States to move forward with this visionary proposal, and to make it an alliance-to-alliance arrangement. An open-skies agreement would be a compelling symbol of the new East-West relationship, it would build confidence and serve as a useful vehicle for the verification of other agreements, including an eventual agreement on conventional forces in Europe.
We are prepared to go beyond moral support. On Sunday, after consultations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, Prime Minister Mulroney announced Canada's offer to act as host to an inter-alliance conference as early as November, in order to explore the possibilities of a formal agreement on open-skies.
 It is of fundamental importance to deepen and widen East-West relations. A stable structure of peace cannot endure if its only component is concurrence on arms control, no matter how far-reaching that agreement might be. Enduring peace requires understanding, a sense of shared problems and a shared stake in the future. Above all, it demands a sense on each side that the survival of the other is in its own best interests. What is required is agreement not only on the avoidance of war but also on the advantages of peace. Therefore we welcome and encourage the broadening dialogue on regional, economic, social and environmental matters.
It is for that reason that Canada has strongly supported expanding the field of activity of NATO to pursue more energetically the alliance's mandate for political and social dialogue. In that connection, during NATO's most recent summit, a Canadian proposal was adopted to assist young political leaders in learning how to make democracy work. More initiatives of that type are required.
The progress in East-West relations owes much to the refreshing breezes of change sweeping Eastern Europe and the USSR, ideology is giving way to compromise. Governments are recognizing that the old ways do not work, that new strategies are required, that lessons may be learned abroad, and that co-operation in the economic and social spheres does not constitute an acknowledgement of defeat but is rather a recipe for success.
Canada's support for the changes now underway in the East is unequivocal. There must be no turning back, and that requires imagination in the West as to practical ways to strengthen the remarkable process of reform and liberalization. In the Eastern bloc and elsewhere around the world, the turning towards democracy and the expansion of the market-place is a welcome victory for pragmatism and realism. Totalitarianism is fading not because it is regarded by its subjects as wrongs it is being discredited because it does not work, it does not deliver.
Democracy is not only a set of values, it is also a statement that there is no monopoly on truth, that different groups at different times may have different solutions to different problems. It is the politics of pragmatism, it works. It delivers, a free market is not simply a particular means of ordering the economy. It is a framework that enables the individual to act on his or her own merits. efforts, and capacities, it conforms to human nature. It is the economics of pragmatism, it works, it delivers, it is for that reason that Canada welcomes the tide of democratization and the shift to the market-place evident around the globe. On that trend rests the hope for social stability. And such stability is a firm foundation for international peace.
The past months have seen remarkable progress in many regional conflicts that have posed serious threats to global stability and caused untold sorrow for their victims. The Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the settlements in Angola and Namibia, the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, and the progress evident in Central America: all are testimony to a new willingness to compromise. They are also testimony to the crucial role played by the Organization end by its Secretary-General in the search for global order. Much more needs to be done. There is a difference between the absence of war and the presence of peace. The international community must continue to do everything in its power to ensure that the processes now underway in those troubled regions move from truce to settlement, from stand-off to stand-down.
We believe it is particularly important to maintain the pressure against apartheid. There are real reasons for encouragement. President de Klerk has promised reform and has demonstrated both flexibility and imagination. The African National Congress has shown courage and foresight in preparing itself to participate in genuine negotiations, popular demonstrations in South Africa, and their tolerance by the authorities, reflect a popular will that reaches across colour. International attention and the use and threat of sanctions have contributed to this climate of change, and they must not be relaxed until substantial reform is in place. 
Even today, children starve and adults perish as old conflicts born of hatred and greed continue to fester, cheating future generations and defiling the honour of ancient civilizations. In Lebanon, blood continues to be spilt in a tragic struggle for domination in that once noble land, while is now being destroyed by those who would be its ruler. We renew the call for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Lebanon and reiterate our strong support for the efforts of the Tripartite Committee of the Arab League. In the Middle East, there is an urgent need for confidence and dialogue. We support Israel's proposals for direct elections in the occupied territories, we welcome the moderation evident in the positions of the Palestine Liberation Organization. But much more confidence-building is needed on both sides if these initial gestures are to be translated into a meaningful peace process for that troubled and war-ravaged region. Canada welcomes President Mubarak's imaginative 10-point plan as one avenue out of the current impasse.
And in Cambodia, the recent International Conference in Paris failed to Produce an agreement, owing to many outstanding difference between the parties. It is to be hoped that the future will bring compromise before that land endures yet another bloody conflict. However, I believe the Paris Conference served a positive Purpose: it has put the issue firmly on the international agenda and identified international control mechanisms and reconstruction processes that can be brought into play when a settlement is reached. As some regional conflicts have been brought under control, the unique and important United Nations instrument of peace-keeping has been brought to bear. At the same time, welcome and pragmatic suggestions are being made to improve operations and funding. Canada supports the Secretary-General's call to provide Peace-keeping with a rational and secure funding base. Peace-keeping has become too important to the mission of the Organization to be subject to charity or whim.

One of the central tasks of this Organization has been to weave a new fabric of international law. This it has done assiduously, often without fanfare. The foundation is being laid for an international society governed by legal principles and codes of conduct. As with domestic society, stability is not possible without law, and law is powerless without consensus. The integration into domestic law of the rights codified by the United Nations in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the covenants on racial discrimination and the rights of women is testimony to a growing international consensus. We must build on this success by acting this year to approve the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We are witnessing today a profound transformation in the substance of international discourse. Issues once thought intractable are now remarkably close to resolution. And issues once considered the province of domestic governments are now the focus of international activity. These are on the international agenda because they are pressing and because no State, no matter how powerful or well- intentioned, can resolve them on its own.
Thus the environment is emerging as the most important international challenge of the remainder of this century and the next. In a very few years, the environment will be seen as a threat to human existence in the same way as nuclear war has been regarded in the past. It is now a challenge to national survival. It is also an area where the distinction between the domestic and the international agenda is collapsing. Pollution knows no borders. In the end, we all share the same air and water-, we all suffer from its corruption or its loss.
Let us agree during this session of the Assembly to hold the proposed Conference on the Environment and development in 1992. Let us move forward towards a convention on climate change with regard to which Canada has played a leading role in the development of a United Nations draft. And let us start a realistic dialog between the developed and the developing world on the environmental scourge which threatens all states, rich and poor. I detect today a new and welcome change in the stale and unproductive state of relations between North and South which marked the 1970s and the first part of this decade. There is growing recognition that grand. vague visions must give way to pragmatic dialogue, and that attribute, blame does little to solve problems.  
In fact, without fanfare, without grand initiative, a new process of dialogue has already begun between the developed and the developing world. In the Cairns Group, diverse entries such as Canada and Thailand, Australia and Argentina have joined together on agricultural issues. international financial institutions, the debt crisis is being approached with a new spirit of realism and a sense of shared risk. Economic prescriptions are now plain, married with political and social considerations. This sensitivity is required if fledgling democracies and fragile societies are not to collapse over the wrenching effect of debt repayments. In the Commonwealth, a multiracial and global membership has allowed for increasing pressure against apartheid. In La Froncophonie, new programmes to preserve the French heritage and promote distance-learning are emerging, and human rights are now on the agenda for the first time. And within the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, there is a refreshing determination to put ideology aside and seek practical co-operation with the developed world. I attended the Summit Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in Belgrade as a guest. I did so in search of common ground on a variety of international Issues. 1 was pressed by the new spirit of moderation shown by many makers, as I was by the wise and deft chairmanship of Yugoslavia. I quote from their Final Declaration:
 We are not to be burdened with prejudice or dogma.' I attended the Summit Conference not because Canada is questioning its alliances - we are a proud and permanent member of NATO and we are committed to a market economy and liberal democracy - rather, I attended because Canada happens to share a world with the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At Belgrade, I took the opportunity to explore further the proposal made by India, Egypt, Senegal and Venezuela during the Paris economic summit for a serious and responsive dialogue on issues of concern to us all. Canada, along with France, supported that proposal in principle at Paris. I reiterate that support now, and suggest some variations that may make the concept more effective. we should all learn from the mistakes of our past, set aside our differing world views, and come together, collectively and calmly, to discuss particular problems those resolution we all seek.
Canada believes it is useful to encourage intensive consultations leading to a new conversation between the developed and the developing world, a conversation on focused issues, with a view to arriving at joint action for a common cause. Conversation, not confrontation. We cannot remake the world. But we can - and we must - redress the errors of the past - methodically, pragmatically, realistically and collectively.
Discussions on the environment, on drugs, on investment, on trade, on debt, are all worthy of early pursuit. The agenda should be balanced, covering issues of interest to both the developed and developing world, we will be pursuing this question actively in the months ahead with our G-7 partners and the developing world, soviet involvement in this effort would be welcome, giving them the opportunity to act further on their interest in contributing to the international order, it would also reflect the universal nature of this challenge.

In this connection, the coming year will provide two opportunities to encourage this new dialogue: the special session on the revitalization of Growth and Development-, and the elaboration of the fourth international development strategy. These two events can contribute to a new understanding of the basis for sustained economic growth and development, particularly for developing countries. 
The challenge before us today is to alter our traditional behaviour at an unprecedented rate, faced as we are with a planet showing so many signs of use and abuse. We know only too well the litany of global horrors before us: a burgeoning global population whose size will expand by almost 3.5 billion in 35 short years-, an ailing environment whose forests are dying or disappearing, whose air is being poisoned, and whose oceans and rivers are becoming dump-sites and cesspools; 14 million children dying each year from common illness and poor nutrition? a generation debilitated by drugs, the world trade in which now exceeds the value of trade in oil and is second only to the arms trade-, dozens of economies unable to pay simultaneously for past mistakes and develop a successful future; the proliferation of weapons - chemical and nuclear, as well as the spreading technology of weapon-delivery systems - creating a time-bomb which threatens the relief we now feel at the new-found co-operation of the super-Powers.
This Organization, like other international assemblies, reflects the world from which it draws its Members and its mission. There have been many successes: the quiet but spectacular victories of UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health Organization; the triumph of peace-keeping, 50,000 participants in which so deservedly received the Nobel Peace Prize; the mediation of disputes, so honourably presided over by the present Secretary-General. But there have also been failures, opportunities lost to dated ideology and the lack of political will. The challenge posed by the future is not to invent new institutions but to make this United Nations family of institutions work more effectively and humanely. 
We are in a new type of race, one in which we will either all be winners or we will all be losers Let us lay to rest the worn out stereotypes of the past. Let us ,	put aside our differences and work forth-rightly for a secure global future. Let us consecrate ourselves anew as united Nations. And let us confront squarely the problems of our era as men and women aware of the challenges before us, mindful of the consequences of failure, and dedicated to solutions that will work, not to dreams that will die.
﻿I am honoured to address the General Assembly today at the beginning of its forty-fourth session. I should like to congratulate Joseph Garba of Nigeria, a distinguished diplomat, on his election as President of this session of the General Assembly, and I wish him success in his presidency.
I feel a great personal pleasure on this occasion, for this is a homecoming for both Barbara and me. The memories of my time here in 1971 and 1972 are still with me today - the human moments, the humorous moments that are part of even the highest undertaking.
With the Assembly's permission, I should like to share one story from one of the many meetings of the Security Council. I was the Permanent Representative of the United States, and I was 45 minutes late for the meeting. All 45 minutes were filled by the first speaker to take the floor, and when I walked in and took my seat the speaker paused, with great courtesy, and said: 'I welcome the Permanent Representative of the United States. And now, for his benefit, I will start my speech all over again, from the beginning.'
That is a true story, at that moment. differences of alliance and ideology didn't matter. The universal groan that went up around that table from every representative present, and the laughter that followed united us all. Today, I would like to begin by recognising - again, a personal privilege - the current Permanent Representatives with whom I served, Ambassador Dugersuren, Ambassador Martinez Ordonez. Ambassador Pabetafika and Permanent Observer Dube. It is wonderful to look around and see so any familiar faces - foreign ministers, members of the Secretariat, and delegates. Of course, the Secretary-General, you were the Permanent representative of your country when we served together. Under-Secretary-General Farah. you were a Permanent Representative back then too. Ambassador Aguilar was here then and is now back. It is an honour to be back with you in this historic Hall, and I apologize if , have forgotten any of you old enough to have served in 1971 and 1972.

The United Nations was established forty-four years ago upon the ashes of war and amidst great hopes. The UN can do great things. No, the United Nations is not perfect, it is not a panacea for the world's problem. But it is a vital forum where the nations of the world seek to replace conflict with consensus, and it must remain a forum for peace. The UN has the support of the United States of America. In recent years, the war of words that is often echoed in this Hall has been giving way to a new mood. 
We have seen a welcome shift from polemics to peace-keeping. United Nations Peace-keepers have given their lives in service to the United Nations. Today, should like to remember one of those soldiers of peace, an American on a mission of peace under the United Nations flag, on a mission for all the world, a man of unquestioned bravery and unswerving, dedication to the United Nations ideal - Lieutenant-Colonel William Richard Higgins. I call on the General Assembly to condemn the murder of this soldier of peace and to call on those responsible to have the decency to return his remains to his family. Let us all - right now, right here - dedicate ourselves and our nations to the cause that Colonel Higgins served so selflessly.
The founders of this historic institution believed that it was here that the nations of the world might come to agree that law, not force, shall govern. And the United Nations can play a fundamental role in the central issue of our time, for today, there is an idea at work around the globe, an idea of undeniable force - and that idea is freedom. Freedom's advance is evident everywhere.- Central Europe and Hungary, where State and society are now in the midst of a movement towards political pluralism and a free-market economy, where the barrier that once enforced an unnatural division between Hungary and its neighbours to the west has been torn down and replaced by a new hope for the future, a new hope in freedom. We see freedom at work in Poland, where, in deference to the will of the people, the Communist Party has relinquished its monopoly on power, and indeed in the Soviet Union, where the world hears the voices of people no longer afraid to speak out or to assert the right to rule themselves.
But freedom's march is not confined to a single continent or to the developed world alone. We see the rise of freedom in Latin America where, one by one, dictatorships are giving way to democracy. We see it on the continent of Africa, where more and more nations see in the system of free enterprise salvation for economies crippled by excessive State control. East and West, North and South, on every continent, we can see the outlines of a new world of freedom.
Of course, freedom's work remains unfinished. The trend we see is not yet universal. Some regimes still stand against the tide. Some rulers still deny the right of the people to govern themselves. But now the power of prejudice and despotism is challenged. Never before have these regimes stood so isolated and alone, so out of step with the steady advance of freedom. Today we are witnessing an ideological collapse, the demise of the totalitarian idea of the omniscient, all-powerful State. There are many reasons for this collapse, but in the end one fact alone explains what we see today: advocates of the totalitarian idea saw its triumph written in the laws of history, they failed to see the love of freedom that was written in the human heart.
Two hundred years ago today, the United States - our Congress - proposed the Bill of Rights: fundamental freedoms belonging to every individual. Rights no Government can deny. Those same rights have been recognized in this congress of nations in the words of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations. From where we stand, on the threshold of this new world of freedom, the trend is clear enough. If, for those who write the history of our times, the twentieth century is remembered as the century of the state, the twenty-first century must be an era of emancipation, the age of the individual. Make no mistake, nothing can stand in the way of freedom's march. There will come a day when freedom is seen the world over to be the universal birthright of every man and woman, of every race and walk of life. Even under the worst circumstances, at the darkest of times, freedom has always remained alive - a distant dream, perhaps, but always alive.
Today, that dream is no longer distant. For the first time, for millions around the world, a new world of freedom is within reach. Today is freedom's moment. You see, the possibility now exists for the creation of a true community of nations, built on shared interests and ideals. A true community, a world where free Governments and free markets meet the rising desire of the people to control their own destiny, to live in dignity, and to exercise freely their fundamental human rights. It is time that worked together to deliver that destiny into the hands of men and women everywhere. Our challenge is to strengthen the foundations of freedom, encourage its advance and face our most urgent challenges, the global challenges of the twenty-first century: economic, health, environmental well-being, the great questions of war and peace.
First, global economic growth. During this decade, a number of developing nations have moved into the ranks of the world's most advanced economies, all of them - each and every one - powered by the engine of free enterprise. In the decade ahead, others can join their ranks, but for many nations, barriers stand in the way. In the case of some countries, these are obstacles of their own making: un-needed restrictions, regulations that act as dead weights on their own economies and obstacles to foreign trade. But other barriers to growth exist, and those, too, require effective action.
Too many developing countries struggle today under a burden of debt that makes growth all but impossible. The nations of the world deserve better opportunity to achieve a measure of control over their own economic fate and build better lives for their own people. The approach the United States has put forward - the Brady plan - will help these nations reduce that debt and, at the same time, encourage the free market reforms that will fuel economic growth.
In just two days, I will be speaking to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and I will discuss there, in more detail, the steps that our nations can take in dealing with the debt problem. But I can say now the new world of freedom is not a world where a few nations live in comfort while others live in want. The power of commerce is a force for progress. Open markets are the key to continued growth in the developing world. Today, the United States buys over one-half of the global manufactured exports that all developing nations combined sell to the industrialized world. It is time for the other advanced economies to follow suit, to create expanded opportunities for trade. I believe we will learn, in the century ahead, that many nations of the world have barely begun to tap their true potential for development. The free market and its fruits are not the special preserve of a few, they are a harvest that everyone can share.
Beyond the challenge of global growth lies another issue of global magnitude: the environment. No line drawn on a map can stop the advance of pollution. Threats to our environment have become international problems. We must develop an international approach to urgent environmental issues, one that seeks common solutions to common problems. The United Nations is already at work on the question of global warming and the effort to prevent oil spills and other disasters from fouling our seas and the air we breathe. And I will tell you now the United States will do its part. We have committed ourselves to the world-wide phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons by the year 2000. We have proposed amending our own Clean Air Act to ensure clean air for our citizens within a single generation. We have banned the import of ivory to protect the elephant and rhinoceros from the human predators who exterminate them for profit. And we have begun to explore ways to work with other nations, with the major industrialized democracies, and in Poland and in Hungary, to make common cause for the sake of our environment.
The environment belongs to all of us. In this new world of freedom, the world's citizens must enjoy this common trust for generations to come. Global economic growth and the stewardship of our planet - both are critical issues.
But as always, questions of war and peace must be paramount to the United Nations. We must move forward to limit and eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Five years ago, at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, I presented a United States draft treaty outlawing chemical weapons. Since then, progress has been made, but time is running out. The threat is growing. More than 20 nations now possess chemical weapons or the capability to produce them. And these horrible weapons are now finding their way into regional conflicts. That is simply unacceptable. For the sake of mankind, we must halt and reverse this threat.
Today I want to announce steps that the United States is ready to take, steps to rid the world of these truly terrible weapons, steps towards a treaty that will ban - eliminate - all chemical weapons from the Earth 10 years from the day it is signed. This initiative contains three major elements. First, in the first eight years of a chemical weapons treaty the United States is ready to destroy nearly all - 98 per cent - of our chemical weapons stockpile, provided the Soviet Union joins the ban, and I think it will. Secondly, we are ready to destroy all of our chemical weapons - 100 per cent, every one - within 10 years, once all nations capable of building chemical weapons sign that total-ban treaty. And thirdly, the United States is ready to begin now. We will eliminate more than 80 per cent of our stockpile even as we work to complete a treaty, if the Soviet Union joins us in cutting chemical weapons to an equal level and if we agree on the conditions, including inspections, under which stockpiles are destroyed.
We know that monitoring a total ban on chemical weapons will be a challenge. But the knowledge we have gained from our recent arms control experience and our accelerating research in this area makes me believe that we can achieve the level of verification that gives us confidence to go forward with the ban. The world has lived too long in the shadow of chemical warfare? so let us act together, beginning today, to rid the Earth of this scourge.
We are serious about achieving conventional arms reductions as well. And that is why we put forward new proposals just last Thursday at the negotiations in Vienna on conventional forces in Europe, proposals that demonstrate our commitment to act rapidly to ease military tensions in Europe and move the nations of that continent one step closer to their common destiny: a Europe whole and free.
The United States is convinced that open and innovative measures can move disarmament forward and also ease international tensions. That is the idea behind the 'open skies' proposal, about which the Soviets have now expressed a positive attitude. It is the idea behind the 'open lands' proposal, permitting for the first time ever free travel for all Soviet and United States diplomats throughout each other's countries. Openness is the enemy of mistrust, and every step towards a more open world is a step towards the new world we seek.
Let me make this comment on our meetings with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Shevardnadze, over the past few days: I am very pleased by the progress made. The Soviet Union removed a number of obstacles to progress on conventional and strategic arms reductions. We reached agreements in principle on issues from verification to nuclear testing. And, of course, we agreed to a summit in the spring or early summer of 1990. I look forward to meeting Mr. Gorbachev there.
Each of those achievements is important in its own right, but they are more important still as signs of a new attitude that prevails between the United States and the USSR. Serious differences remain; we know that. But the willingness to deal constructively and candidly with those differences is news that we and indeed the world must welcome. We have not entered into an era of perpetual peace. The threats to peace that nations face may today be changing, but they have not vanished. In fact, in a number of regions around the world, a dangerous combination is now emerging: regimes armed with old and unappeasable animosities and modern weapons of mass destruction. That development will raise the stakes whenever war breaks out. Regional conflict may well threaten world peace as never before.
The challenge of preserving peace is a personal one for all individuals right here in this Hall. Mr. Secretary-General, I say with great respect that you have made it your own. The United Nations can be a mediator, a forum where parties in conflict come in search of peaceful solutions. For the sake of peace, the United Nations must redouble its support for the peace efforts now under way in regions of conflict all over the world. I assure the Assembly that the United States is determined to take an active role in settling regional conflicts. Sometimes our role in regional disputes is and will be highly public, and sometimes, like many others do, we work quietly behind the scenes. But always, we are working for positive change and lasting peace.
Our world faces other, less conventional threats no less dangerous to international peace and stability. Illegal drugs are a menace to social order and a source of human misery wherever they gain a foothold. The nations which suffer this scourge must join forces in the fight, and we are. Let me salute the commitment and extraordinary courage of one country in particular: Colombia, where
we are working with the people and their President, Virgil lo Barco, to put the drug cartels cut of business and bring the drug lords to justice.
Finally, we must join forces to combat the threat of terrorism. Every nation and the United Nations must send the outlaws of the world a clear message hostage-taking and the terror of random violence are methods that cannot win the world's approval. Terrorism of any kind is repugnant to all values that a civilized world holds in common. And make no mistake.- Terrorism is a means that no end, no matter how just, can sanctify.
Whatever the challenge, freedom greatly raises the chances of our success. Freedom's moment is a time for hope for all of the world, because freedom, once set in motion, takes on a momentum of its own. As I said the day I assumed the presidency of our country, we do not have to talk late into the night about which form of government is better. We know that free government, democracy, is best. And I believe that is the hard-won truth of our time, the unassailable fact that still stands at the end of a century of great struggle and human suffering. And this is true not because all our differences must give way to democracy , but because democracy makes room for all our differences. In democracy, diversity finds its common home.
At the very heart of the democratic ideal is respect for freedom of belief, freedom of thought and action, in all its diversity, for human rights. The world has experienced enough of the ideologies that have promised to remake man in some new and better image. We have seen the colossal tragedies and dashed hopes. We know now that freedom and democracy hold the answers: what men and nations want is the freedom to live by their own lights and a chance to prosper, in peace.
When I began today I spoke to you about peace-keeping. I want to speak to you now about peace-making. We must bring peace to the people who have never known its blessings. There is a painting that hangs on the wall of my office in the White House which pictures President Abraham Lincoln and his generals meeting near the end of a war that remains the bloodiest in the history of my country. Outside at that moment a battle rages, in this picture, and yet what we see in the distance is a rainbow, a symbol of hope, of the passing of the storm. That painting is called 'The Peace-makers'. For me, it is a constant reminder that our struggle, the struggle for peace, is a struggle blessed by hope.
I do remember sitting in this Hall, I remember the mutual respect among all of us proudly serving as representatives, yes, I remember the almost endless speeches - and I do not want this to be one of them - the Security Council sessions, the receptions, those long receiving lines, the formal meetings of the General Assembly, and the informal discussions in the delegates' lounge. And I remember something more, something beyond the frantic pace and sometimes frustrating experiences of daily life here: The heartbeat of the United Nations, the quiet conviction that we could make the world more peaceful, more free. What we sought then, all of us, now lies within our reach. I ask each of you here in this Hall:
Can we not bring a unity of purpose to the United Nations? Can we not make this new world of freedom the common destiny we seek? I believe we can. I know we must. My solemn wish today is that here, among the United Nations, that spirit will take hold, and that all men and all nations will make freedom's moment their own.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the work of the United Nations.  
1.	 It is my privilege to extend to you once again the warm congratulations of the United States delegation on your election to the Presidency of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your country has few peers in the contributions it has made to the work of this Organization. Your father was a leader in the League of Nations, and now, in this session of the General Assembly, you are adding a new chapter in the family tradition. In the United Nations community we have long known you as an able spokesman of your country, as a participant in the life of the United Nations from its very beginning and an authority on the Charter, as a leading scholar and practitioner in international law, and as one whose personal outlook is strongly humanitarian and imbued with hope and determination for a better future. We are indeed fortunate to have you to lead us in this session devoted to the strengthening and improvement of the United Nations.
2.	During this session we shall commemorate with fitting ceremony one of the most creative and hopeful events of this century, the founding of the United Nations twenty-five years ago. It is right that this commemoration should be held. It is far more important, however, that the nations gathered at this session should so act together as to strengthen the United Nations for the future, to ensure that we are closer to 'peace, justice and progress' five, ten and twenty- five years hence than we are today. The world is unlikely to care much what we say about the past. It will care a great deal what we do about the future.
3.	The problems the world faces today are no less grave than those it faced twenty-five years ago. Indeed they are in many respects far graver. Unless and until the Members of the United Nations demonstrate their willingness to deal effectively with these problems, the confidence of the world's peoples in the United Nations will remain uncertain and precarious.
4.	In the view of the United States, the most critical international problem today is the same as that which faced the founders of the United Nations: the need to build a reliable framework for peace and security among nations. As President Nixon said in this Assembly a year ago: '... there is no nobler destiny, nor any greater gift that one age could make to the ages that follow, than to forge the key to a lasting peace'. [1755th meeting, para. 45.]
5.	In this conviction the United States has sought in the last two years to frame foreign policies which would help to make the international scene less destructively competitive, less strident, more cooperative and orderly. We have sought, in the spirit of the Charter, to pursue peaceful settlement of all conflicts and confrontations, and we have urged others to do likewise.
6.	The most significant of these efforts has been the strategic arms limitation discussions between my country and the Soviet Union. If at last we can check the nuclear arms race, the world will have been helped to move away from its gravest danger and toward new and more rational relationships.
7.	The United States also seeks, through a process of serious negotiation, to ease the tensions that arise from the division of Europe. We have welcomed the efforts of the Federal Republic of Germany to normalize relations with its eastern neighbors; we are seeking in fourPower talks to assure the security and wellbeing of the residents of Berlin; we have joined our NATO allies in proposing exploratory talks on the reduction of forces in central Europe. We hope these efforts will find the Soviet Union and its allies forthcoming.
8.	In VietNam, over eighteen months ago, the United States reversed the trend in American involvement in the war. We began a steady, uninterrupted reduction in the number of our troops. We have made a negotiated peace our highest priority. Although North VietNam has as yet shown no serious intention to negotiate a solution under which the South VietNamese people can freely decide their own future, this remains our goal and we shall not be discouraged in seeking it.
A/PV.1854
9.	My Government has likewise sought ways to move toward a constructive relationship with mainland China. To this end, we have taken a number of unilateral steps to ease tensions. We are ready at any time to resume the talks in Warsaw.
10.	Finally, nowhere in the world today is there more urgent need to move from confrontation to negotiation than in the Middle East. The legacy of bitterness, hatred and suspicion there contains the seeds of even greater tragedy not only for the Middle East but for the world, unless there is early progress toward reconciliation and peace based on the legitimate interests of all the States and peoples of the region.
11.	As the United Nations community well knows, the United States has made major diplomatic efforts in recent months and weeks to help bring about peace at long last in the Middle East. While recent developments in the area, including the tragic death of President Nasser, have cast a shadow over the high hopes of just a few weeks ago that a beginning toward that goal had been made, those hopes have not been extinguished. For the most part, the guns remain silent along the ceasefire lines. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) stands as a beacon pointing the way to peace, and the parties concerned, in accepting the United States initiative of June, have committed themselves to carry out that resolution in all its parts. Ambassador Jarring is ready to resume his mission whenever conditions permit. We earnestly hope that the parties themselves and all others concerned will now bend every effort to the task of building on the beginning that has already been made.
12.	This will require above all serious steps to restore and strengthen confidence in the integrity of the ceasefire and military standstill agreement along the Suez Canal. It will also require, if negotiations are to move forward, a willingness by the parties to move from their maximum positions on the elements of a realistic and equitable peace settlement. In this spirit, my Government is prepared to contribute to renewed efforts toward peace in the Middle East.
13.	In this anniversary year the United States, like many other Members, has given especially careful thought to means by which the United Nations can be better enabled to fulfill its purposes.
14.	My delegation has listened, and will continue to listen attentively, to the suggestions of others in this regard. In the same spirit the United States will offer proposals, or support the proposals of others, with these objectives among others: first, to put United Nations peacekeeping operations on a firmer and more reliable basis; second, to make the United Nations more effective in the peaceful settlement of disputes; third, to promote new steps in the field of disarmament; fourth, to move closer by peaceful means to the goals of decolonization and human equality; fifth, to support the Second Development Decade; sixth, to help slow down too rapid rates of population growth; seventh, to promote the exploitation of the seabeds and outer space for human benefit; eighth, to organize common action within the United Nations to safeguard the global environment; ninth, to encourage young people from all parts of the world to devote themselves to international service; tenth, to improve the organization, administration and procedures of the United Nations.
15.	If the twenty-fifth General Assembly were to move forward substantially in these directions, this session would indeed rank as one of the most fruitful in United Nations history.
16.	Let me now comment briefly on these points.
17.	We shall all of us on this podium and in the First Committee have much to say during this session about strengthening international peace and security, and about the need to live up to the Charter. This is quite proper. However, what is needed most in this respect is not still more sweeping declarations that merely restate the purposes and principles of the Charter. What is needed is more effective United Nations action on the concrete issues before us, on the Middle East, on United Nations peacekeeping procedures, on means of pacific settlement. Until we demonstrate our willingness to take such effective action, world opinion will continue to be skeptical, no matter what ringing declarations we may make, as to whether the Members of the United Nations are really serious about strengthening international peace and security.
18.	I now come to a subject which should be at the very center of our concern if we wish in fact to strengthen peace and security through the United Nations. I speak of United Nations peacekeeping.
19.	Because the world situation in the past twenty- five years developed differently from what the founders of the United Nations foresaw, it has not been found possible to create forces for the maintenance of international peace and security along the lines laid down in certain articles of Chapter VII. We would hope that at some point the provisions of the Charter designed for enforcement action can be implemented.
20.	In the meantime, however, a modus vivendi has been built up, entirely consistent with the Charter, which has carried out significant and successful peacekeeping operations, sometimes with observers, sometimes with substantial forces, in the Middle East, in Kashmir, in the Congo, in Cyprus and elsewhere. Still it is all too clear that these ad hoc and improvised arrangements need major improvement in several respects if future peacekeeping is to be effective.
21.	The Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, under the able and patient leadership of Ambassador Cuevas Cancino of Mexico, has been laboring for nearly two years at the task of developing peacekeeping guidelines. During the past year the United States has put forward concrete proposals for new procedures that would meet the political concerns of all and yet allow United Nations forces to move rapidly to carry out decisions of the Security Council. But the broad agreement that all desire is still lacking.
22.	It is high time however that the General Assembly, in this twenty-fifth anniversary year, demanded significant movement on this problem. It would be a mistake not to move at all until all are agreed to move all the way. There is strong reason and sufficient consensus for some forward movement at this Assembly. The United States will be prepared to join with others in concrete proposals to this effect.
23.	In this connexion we welcome the statement made at Lusaka in the Declaration of the nonaligned countries concerning the United Nations, that measures should be taken at this session of the General Assembly to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward with interest to proposals that may be made by those present at that meeting.
24.	Of course, peacekeeping without peaceful settlement is only an expedient, necessary but incomplete and inconclusive. The most potent preventive of conflict is not machinery but the will of disputing parties to show restraint and a spirit of conciliation, and to persist in peaceful methods until settlement is reached. This is a solemn obligation of every United Nations Member under the Charter, and no nation deserves more honor than those who have lived up to it in spite of every obstacle.
25.	In this past year such peaceful settlements, or major steps towards them, have been recorded in a number of situations which reflect great credit on the statesmanship of those involved. I have in mind, for example, the progress made, with the assistance of the Organization of American States, toward resolving the dispute between El Salvador and Honduras; and also the recent peaceful decision on the future of Bahrain, in which good offices provided by the Secretary General played a major role.
26.	As these cases show, where the will to settle exists, effective machinery can do much to help. This is true of regional organizations, and it is no less true of the relevant organs of the United Nations, above all the Security Council.
27.	In this connexion we have welcomed the Security Council's decision [see 1544th meeting] as proposed by Finland, to hold periodic high-level meetings under Article 28 of the Charter. My country looks forward to taking part in the first such meeting later this fall. We welcome likewise the valuable suggestion of Brazil committees of the Council, including the parties to a dispute, might be created to help settle particular disputes.
28.	To the same end, the United States would favor the reactivation of certain machinery for peaceful settlement which has long been dormant. Many years ago the General Assembly created a Panel on Inquiry and Conciliation [resolution 268 (III)], and more recently a register of fact-finding experts. My Government will soon nominate qualified individuals for both of these bodies. We believe fact-finders should be available to
1 Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka, Zambia, from 8 to 10 September 1970.
the SecretaryGeneral or other organs of the United Nations, or directly to Member States, to report on the facts of situations of international concern at the request or with the consent of one or more of the parties.
29.	Finally, it is most important that we rejuvenate and strengthen the highest organ of judicial settlement, the International Court of Justice. The United States recently joined with others in the Security Council in referring to the Court for its advisory opinion certain aspects of the Namibia situation. We have also joined with others in submitting to this General Assembly an agenda item calling for a review of the role of the Court. We hope this review will suggest ways to enable the Court to make a more substantial contribution to the establishment of the rule of law among nations.
30.	The world has witnessed in recent weeks shocking examples of the consequences of failure to abide by this rule of law examples which have been alluded to by numerous previous speakers on this podium. Hundreds of innocent individuals engaged in peaceful international travel have been brutally seized as hostages in a conflict in which they were in no way involved. Not only their safety and convenience have been placed in jeopardy but their very lives. As President Nixon pointed out in this forum a year ago, this issue 'involves the interests of. . . every air passenger and the integrity of that structure of order upon which a world community depends' [1755th meeting, para. 74].
31.	That this view is widely shared is evident from the almost universal condemnation of these most recent acts by Governments the world over and by the resolution on this matter adopted unanimously by the Security Council [286 (1970)]. But condemnation is not enough. It is time to act. The Tokyo Convention, providing for the prompt return of hijacked aircraft passengers and crew, requires the broadest international support. The same is true of the International Civil Aviation Organization's draft multilateral convention for the extradition and punishment of hijackers. In addition, the United States has submitted new proposals to the ICAO, for which I urge your most earnest consideration and support.
32.	The General Assembly's extensive annual debates and resolutions on many aspects of arms control and disarmament have long played, and continue to play, an important part in international negotiations on this most critical of all our problems. I need only mention the partial nuclear test-ban Treaty,  the outer space Treaty [resolution 2222 (XXI)] and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. The disarmament conference at Geneva has this year registered significant progress by achieving wide consensus on a draft treaty to prohibit the emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on a vast area of the earth's surface the seabed beneath the oceans.  We hope this draft treaty will be supported by the General Assembly at this session and opened for signature shortly thereafter.
33.	I can assure the Assembly that the United States Government is unceasingly aware of the worldwide concern and need for an end to the arms race and the perilous burden of armaments in all its forms, and that we shall do whatever one negotiating partner can do to bring about new agreements on new steps toward the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament.
34.	Permit me to say a word about a matter of quite different but equally wide concern that of human rights throughout the world.
35.	In addition to the basic responsibility of Governments to maintain human rights for all their citizens, the United Nations under the Charter has a clear responsibility in this regard. To strengthen the implementation of that responsibility my Government hopes the General Assembly at this session will create a new post, that of High Commissioner for Human Rights, to advise United Nations organs in this field and to assist States, at their request, with human rights problems. This proposal has been thoroughly studied and fully justified. It deserves a high priority at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
36.	A particular issue of human rights that is of acute concern to my Government, among others, is the protection of the rights of prisoners of war. While these rights have long since been internationally guaranteed, they are in practice still denied to many prisoners of war, as American wives and families of such prisoners know to their great sorrow. The United States strongly hopes that this Assembly will press for worldwide observance of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, verified by impartial inspection. It is intolerable that the tragedy of armed conflict should be compounded by additional inhumanities in violation of international norms.
37.	In no field have the aims of the United Nations found more dramatic fulfilment during its first quarter of a century than in the field of decolonization. Before the Second World War a third of mankind lived in colonial dependencies. Today the proportion is less than 1 per cent. A revolution of independence has created some sixty new nations and has been the main factor in increasing the membership of the United Nations from 51 to 126.
38.	However, the situation in much of southern Africa is still characterized by the denial of self-determination and of racial equality. The United Nations and its member States must continue to exert peaceful efforts to defend and advance these basic human rights of the peoples concerned. Their cause is just and must in time prevail.
39.	Against these evils the United States in recent months has taken further steps. We put into effect last May a new policy designed to discourage United States investment in, and trade with, Namibia so long as South Africa remains in unlawful occupation. We urge other Governments to join us in this policy. My Government continues strictly to observe resolutions in regard to sanctions against the illegal regime in Rhodesia and in regard to the sale of arms to South Africa. We have closed our consulate in Salisbury. We shall continue in every peaceful and practicable way to pursue the ends of justice, equality and self determination.
40.	High on the list of the United Nations contributions to human progress is its longstanding effort to assist in comprehensive global development. That effort is being continued and, we hope, improved and strengthened through the launching of the Second United Nations Development Decade.
41.	The success of the Decade will depend most of all on the policies of Member States, both developed and developing. To bring all these policies into effective focus is the ambitious aim of the development strategy. The United States strongly supports the strategy which is before this Assembly [A 17982, para. 16] and intends to participate fully in this common enterprise.
42.	I wish to leave no doubt of the serious commitment of the United States to the Second Development Decade. President Nixon, in a series of policy decisions and especially in his recent announcement on the new focus of United States economic assistance, has made clear our intention:
(a)	To reverse the downward trend in United States development assistance;
(b)	To increase substantially United States contributions to multilateral development institutions including the World Bank, the International Development Association, the regional development banks and the United Nations Development program so that, as the capabilities of these institutions increase, we may be able to channel through them most of our official development assistance;
(c)	Further to encourage the efforts of donor nations to 'untie' their bilateral aid to developing countries from the obligation to import products of the donor country;
(<d) To bring United States science and technology more effectively to bear on the problems of development, and for this purpose to create a new United States International Development Institute;
(<?) To take new steps to stimulate American private investment in developing countries within the framework of the developing countries' plans.
43.	These approaches are already reflected in the new policies my country has announced toward Latin America and Africa, which stress continued assistance, greater multilateral participation, and increased trade and investment.
44.	Finally, bearing in mind the crucial connexion between trade and development, the United States is pressing for a liberalized system of generalized tariff preferences for products of developing countries, with preferential access to the American market, and we are urging that the developing countries receive similar access to the markets of all developed countries.
45.	I wish to add a particular comment on the role of the United Nations Development program. This program, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, has done important pioneering work in development assistance. Its machinery, however, was built for a smaller program and must be reorganized to meet its growing responsibilities. With the aid of last year's excellent 'capacity study' ,  the program is now preparing to put the necessary reforms into effect. In planning our future contributions to this important program we in the United States will give major weight to the progress actually achieved m undertaking these reforms.
46.	In recent years people all over the world have suddenly awakened to the inexorable and tragic fact that excessive population growth can, if continued much longer, frustrate all our hopes for peace, justice and progress. There can be no progress for the majority of mankind if population growth outstrips all available means of development. There can be no justice for the majority of mankind where population expands faster than production and social services. There can be no peace for the majority of mankind where progress and justice are unattainable because of unrestrained population growth.
47.	This is not a problem confined to either developed or developing countries. In my own country, although our growth rate has recently slowed to about 1 per cent a year, we have adopted as a national goal the availability within five years of family planning services to every citizen.
48.	Clearly, the need is equally urgent in many nations striving for development whose annual population growth in some cases approaches 4 per cent which means a doubling of the number of people in less than twenty- years. The care and feeding of such enormous numbers of dependent children, their upbringing in conditions compatible with human dignity, could constitute such a burden as to nullify progress in economic development and to cause living standards to remain at past low levels or even to fall lower.
49.	The United States is convinced that the vigorous pursuit of family planning policies is an indispensable element in the strategy of development. In this conviction we have pledged this year $7.5 million to the recently established United Nations Fund for Population Activities, whose services to requesting Governments are rapidly growing.
50.	In the context of development I wish also to emphasize the enormous potential of the world's deep seabeds, whose exploitation is just now beginning to come within the reach of our technology.
51.	Last May President Nixon, in a farreaching announcement concerning the oceans, proposed that an international regime be established by treaty for the exploitation of seabed resources beyond the depth of 200 meters. He further proposed that this regime 'should provide for the collection of substantial mineral royalties to be used for international community purposes, particularly economic assistance to developing countries'. Early in August the United States circulated in the United Nations seabed Committee  a draft convention [A18021, annex V], embodying these and other important proposals in the President's announcement.
52.	These proposals, if carried out, will amount to a new departure in the history of nations. Never in history has the exploitation of resources of such great potential value been placed under the supervision and regulation of an effective international authority. Never in history has assurance been offered that the international community could have a substantial, independent source of revenue to be equitably divided to serve the interests of mankind as a whole.
53.	The United States hopes that the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly will advance this important enterprise so that a sound and workable international seabed regime, backed up by effective machinery, can come into being as soon as possible. To this end it is important that States refrain from making further claims to jurisdiction over the seabeds or over the waters of the oceans. We believe that a conference on subjects related to the law of the sea, including seabeds, should be called as soon as practicable and that preparatory steps should be initiated by this session of the General Assembly.
54.	I come now to an issue of critical and rapidly growing importance the protection of the human environment. Development and protection of the environment are not mutually contradictory; indeed, they must go hand in hand if the world is to be a fit place in which to live. The United Nations is in a key position to foster the necessary cooperation so that the needs of the environment, as well as those of development, receive the energetic attention they require.
55.	Already the plans for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 have begun to take shape and have helped to focus the attention of United Nations Member Governments on this worldwide challenge; but we should not wait for the Stockholm Conference before launching necessary initiatives.
56.	Therefore the United States urges that all of us here, representing both developed and developing countries, work together to enable the United Nations to take the following steps. Firstly, it should identify those environmental problems, especially those pollutants in the atmosphere and the oceans, which are or may be dangerous on a global scale. Second, it should make plans for a coordinated world monitoring network to keep track of these environmental dangers. This network should build on existing programs, particularly those of the agencies of the United Nations family, and should use the most advanced data processing and satellite technology, such as the earth resource survey satellites which my country has been developing. Third, it should collect and analyze the suggestions of governments concerning environmental guidelines for States, both developed and developing, as well as for international institutions engaged in development programs. Fourth, it should explore the possibility of establishing international air and water quality standards. The United States hopes the Assembly at this session will act to advance those important objectives.
51. A newly acute problem which threatens a growing number of societies is the epidemic spread of addiction to dangerous drugs, especially among young people. This phenomenon has mushroomed in a very few years, not only in my own country but in a number of others, both developed and developing. It creates untold misery, violence, lawlessness and economic and human loss.This menace must be stopped. To do so it will be necessary to reinforce existing international agreements and to strengthen the longstanding and excellent work of agencies in this field, especially those of the United Nations. We are glad to note that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs is meeting now to deal with the whole range of problems involved, from the poppy field through the international syndicate to the needle in the vein. My Government hopes that an adequate action program will emerge from this process and will command the energetic support of the community of nations. The United States has already offered, subject to Congressional approval, a contribution of $2 million to such a program.
58.	Finally, it is important that we make better use of the talents of young people in international service, especially the service of the United Nations. Many delegations to this session, including that of the United States, contain youthful members as suggested by the General Assembly a year ago. That is entirely fitting, because the fate of the United Nations and indeed of world peace will soon be in their hands.
59.	With that in mind President Nixon, in his address to this Assembly a year ago [1755th meeting], pledged the enthusiastic support of the United States for Iran's proposal to establish an international volunteer service corps [see 1695th meeting, para. 75], to work in the cause of development and to be recruited on an individual basis from the people, principally young people, of many countries. We hope that proposal will be given final approval in the current session. We hope also that the United Nations will seek new ways to encourage able young people to find careers in its Secretariat and those of the other agencies of the United Nations family.
60.	In these remarks I have discussed only a few of the major tasks facing the United Nations in the years ahead. Even those, however, are enough tc make it obvious that, if we indeed address ourselves to such tasks, the effectiveness of this Organization will be tested more severely than ever. To meet this test we shall have to be far more attentive than has been our habit to many matters of structure, organization and procedure. For example, I would mention the following.
61.	In considering applications for membership by very small States, we must make sure that they are not only willing but also, as the Charter stipulates, able to carry out the Charter's obligations. As the SecretaryGeneral has for years pointed out, many Territories now moving towards independence are too small, either in population or in resources or both, to carry out the minimum obligations which membership requires. Yet these very small entities need more than most the assistance that the United Nations system can provide. Where the burden of membership would be excessive, we should provide a form of association with the United Nations which would enable such States to enjoy the benefits without the burdens of the system.
62.	The persistence of the United Nations financial deficit undermines confidence in the Organization, threatens its capabilities in many fields and casts a cloud over its future. The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral's recent call for 'a concerted effort to restore the financial solvency of the Organization'. We hope that he will himself take a lead in such an effort, in which we shall certainly play our part.
63.	In the annual choice of non-permanent members of the Security Council, it would be well that, as the Charter requires, due regard be specially paid, in the first instance, to the prospective member's contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security, rather than merely to rotation among the members of geographic groups.
64.	The primary consideration in selecting individuals for posts in the Secretariat, above all for senior posts, should be fully to meet the Charter's 'paramount consideration' namely 'the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity'.
65.	We must at long last take decisive steps to streamline the excessively time-consuming organization and procedures of the General Assembly, as Canada has wisely proposed, or else we shall either 'drown in a sea of words' or suffocate under an avalanche of paper.
66.	We must take more effective measures to ensure that the entire United Nations system is so organized and managed that it responds efficiently to the directives of its governing organs and to the priority needs of the world. That will require much better administrative and budgetary coordination and control than we have yet achieved.
67.	The United States offers these suggestions in the spirit of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, which we understand to be a spirit of sober determination to make this Organization more effective, to make its future more responsive than its past to the imperative needs of men, women and children everywhere. Many other delegations have offered or will offer their proposals in the same spirit. The test of our seriousness and our success will be how much of this agenda of objectives we can begin to carry out.
68.	We are assembled from the four corners of the earth. The interests of the Governments we speak for often seem to be and sometimes are in contradiction. But by our presence here, by our commitment to the United Nations and its Charter, we have acknowledged that we also have interests in common, interests in peace, justice and progress, interests in the continued habitability of our planet, common interests which we are at last beginning to recognize are inescapable and overriding.
69.	The question now is, do we have the wit not only to perceive these common interests in some vague rhetorical way, but also to act upon them together realistically and decisively even at the cost sometimes of older and narrower interests? If we do not do so, history may sweep aside not only this Organization but also the nations that compose it.
70.	The SecretaryGeneral has said that we may have only ten years left to cope effectively with the problems of our times before they become so staggering as to be beyond our capacities. As we enter the Disarmament Decade and the Second Development Decade, let us keep that warning foremost in our minds and let us be determined to act together to avert catastrophe.





The General Assembly is fortunate indeed to have as its President, in this year of anniversary, a distinguished citizen of Norway, a country that gave the United Nations its first Secretary General and has always made a constructive contribution to our work here. As the General Assembly knows, our President is a member of a family that for half a century or more has played an active part in international organizations. I wish you well, Mr. President, in your new responsibilities and assure you of the active support of the Canadian delegation.
35.	I would also like to congratulate the retiring President, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph, who fulfilled her responsibilities with grace and distinction, bringing to her task long experience at the United Nations and special knowledge of the African questions which occupied so much of our attention during her year of office.
36.	Only a few weeks ago, the ceasefire in the Middle East and the proposals for negotiations to settle the conflict there gave cause for some cautious optimism. Today we are faced with a deadly serious situation in the Kingdom of Jordan, a situation which has already manifested itself in new violence and bloodshed. The struggle between forces within Jordan threatens to involve neighboring countries and there is a constant risk of widening conflict involving more distant Powers. In the course of these events we have seen new dimensions added to what is already a growing threat to world order. I refer to acts of air piracy. In the Middle East a significant new dimension is the holding of innocent people hostage for ransom for political and other purposes, one of these being to compound the difficulties already surrounding the ceasefire.
37.	No Government in the world today can fail to be concerned about the farreaching implications of this kind of international lawlessness. It is my strong conviction, and the strong conviction of my Government also, that legal and technical arrangements such as those being discussed in the International Civil Aviation Organization, necessary as they are, cannot produce the whole solution. Air hijacking must come to be regarded as abhorrent, never to be condoned or justified, regardless of the motives of the hijackers.
38.	Even without these new complications the peace talks in the Middle East are stalled because of substantial charges and counter-charges of ceasefire violations. The parties and the sponsoring Powers that brought about the ceasefire must be aware of the dangers implicit in this situation of deadlock and deterioration.
39.	I believe that the United Nations is on trial in the face of an obvious threat to the peace in the Middle East. This means that all of us, the Member nations, are on trial. If we are to meet this challenge we must stand behind and support the efforts Ambassador Gun nar Jarring and others are making to bring peace to that troubled area.
40.	If the Middle East conflict, with all its new dimensions, were the only threat facing the world, that would be sufficient to occupy fully the energies, imagination and resources of the world community. But in other parts of the world th re are formidable obstacles to peace and security.
41.	We have found no answers to the continuing race conflict in southern Africa. It continues to smolder more and more dangerously and if nothing is done might end in a conflagration engulfing the southern half of the continent.
42.	In IndoChina, war burns with varying degrees of intensity while the talks Paris show little sign of coming to grips with the real issues.
43.	Europe remains divided but there have been some encouraging developments. We can be thankful that deteriorating situations in other parts of the world have not been used to impede the movement toward the relaxation of tension between the superPowers. The strategic arms limitation talks continue, rapprochement between West Germany and the Soviet Union has been taking places, and similar improvements are foreshadowed.
44.	While international conflicts, and especially outbreaks of violence, of necessity occupy the attention of many Member Governments, they must not be allowed to overshadow equally important developments of concern to the entire world community.
45.	Developing nations see a crisis in the international development programme. Canada shares their concern and is making an increasing contribution.
46.	Environmental issues are looming larger each day. The United Nations, I am happy to say, is responding. Canada has made available the services of a distinguished public servant, Mr. Maurice Strong, to be SecretaryGeneral of the 1972 conference .
47.	All around the globe nations are in a state of uncertainty about the economic outlook.
48.	World prosperity and world security are indivisible and depend upon the strength of the world economy. Over the years the United Nations has set up partly in anticipation of needs, partly in response to demands a large and impressive family of intergovernmental bodies and other international instruments for strengthening cooperation in important fields such as finance, trade, and economic and social activity. Their contributions to better world conditions rank high on the record of United Nations achievement. The continuing need is to keep them effective.
49.	In my speech on behalf of Canada last year [1769th meeting], I drew attention to the need for renewal of the United Nations. Events in the past twelve months, some of which I have spoken of, have brought a new sense of urgency to this need. Procedural improvements can help, and I will have something to say about this in a few moments. They cannot in themselves meet the need.
50.	In its work for mankind the United Nations is today facing new threats, new constraints and new obstacles. The very assumptions upon which the Organization operates must be reexamined if the aims of the Charter are to be advanced. This advance will depend on the readiness of Members to exploit opportunities, to bring new attitudes to bear and to set practical objectives for the Organization.
51.	The Canadian delegation believes that in this year of anniversary we should seek practical ways of improving the United Nations capacity for converting common purpose into common action. It is ever more difficult for this Assembly to cope with the number and complexity of international programs and projects it has set in motion. Important work is often postponed or left incomplete. This compounds organizational and administrative problems and imposes additional expenses, burdens and obligations .
52.	This is the time, in our opinion, to follow up the improvements in the Second Committee last year and, rather than proceeding piecemeal, to take a comprehensive look at the General Assembly's procedures and organization. This is neither an original nor a new idea, but at this quarter-century mark in United Nations history we in this Assembly face again the task of self improvement.
53.	It was this belief that led my Government, with the support of twelve countries, to request the inclusion in the agenda of an item for consideration by the Assembly entitled 'Rationalization of the procedures and organization of the General Assembly'. This proposal [A17992 and Corr.l], which will have a number of additional cosponsors from various regions, envisages the establishment of a committee with equitable representation from all groups.
54.	The committee would report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly at its next session, thus allowing the committee time to give thorough study to the problems before it. My delegation has in mind that any reforms to be effective, must attract the widest possible support and be based on a consensus to be endorsed by the Assembly, hopefully at the next session.
55.	In terms of the material and operations to be studied, the committee's mandate should be wide. This study would take into account the nature of the Assembly's work, its priorities and organization and the effectiveness of its machinery. At the same time, the committee's mandate should be narrow in that it would restrict its recommendations to the procedure and organization of the Assembly as envisaged within the limits of the Charter.
56.	Our proposal is a modest one, but I believe that even limited changes could have a very beneficial effect on our working methods and on the results achieved. Areas to be studied would obviously include documentation, rules of procedure and related questions. The proposed committee would also study the ways in which items are allocated to the main committees of the Assembly, Recommendations would take into account the need to ensure that all important political items were properly placed and adequately considered in future Assemblies.
57.	The effectiveness of the General Assembly and the United Nations will always depend upon the will and determination of the Member States. Changes in procedure and organization cannot of themselves improve the quality of the General Assembly's performance. They can enable the will of the Assembly to be translated into action more swiftly, accurately and effectively. We should not underrate such improvements, and the Canadian delegation does not.
58.	There is no need to call into question the basic structure of ti>e Organization. But the fact that we do not wish to rebuild the house does not mean that we should delay essential repairs to the plumbing and the wiring. For this reason I call upon Member States to give urgent and continuing attention to the essential detailed work that is required, without losing sight of the fundamental need for all of us to reexamine our own attitudes to our responsibilities under the Charter.
59.	The relevance and the competence of the United Nations are being called into question all over the world. The world community needs the United Nations. It needs a United Nations that has renewed itself, that has transformed itself from an arena in which Governments jostle for transient political advantage into a place of action where issues are faced, solutions are found and problems resolved. Such a United Nations would do more than serve the ambitions of member Governments, it would begin to meet the needs of the peoples of the world in whose name the Charter was proclaimed. Canada's faith in the United Nations ideal is unimpaired, and we will continue to work with others to strengthen and renew this great body upon which so many of man's hopes are fixed.


Each year we come together to 
reaffirm the founding vision of this institution. For most 
of recorded history, individual aspirations were subject 
to the whims of tyrants and empires, and divisions of 
race, religion and tribe were settled through the sword 
and the clash of armies. 

The idea that nations and peoples could come 
together in peace to solve their disputes and advance a 
common prosperity seemed unimaginable. It took the 
awful carnage of two world wars to shift our thinking. 
The leaders who built the United Nations were not naive. 
They did not think that this body could eradicate all 
wars. But in the wake of millions dead and continents 
in rubble and with the development of nuclear weapons 
that could annihilate a planet, they understood that 
humanity could not survive the course it was on. They 
gave us this institution, believing that it could allow 
us to resolve conflicts, enforce rules of behaviour and 
build habits of cooperation that would grow stronger 
over time.

For decades, the United Nations has in fact made 
a difference, from helping to eradicate disease to 



educating children and brokering peace. But like 
every generation of leaders, we face new and profound 
challenges, and this body continues to be tested. The 
question is whether we possess the wisdom and the 
courage as nation States and members of an international 
community to squarely meet those challenges. Can the 
United Nations meet the test of our time?

And for much of my tenure as President, some of 
our most urgent challenges have revolved around an 
increasingly integrated global economy and our efforts 
to recover from the worst economic crisis of our lifetime. 
Now, five years after the global economy collapsed and 
thanks to coordinated efforts by the countries here 
today, jobs are being created, global financial systems 
have stabilized and people are once again being lifted 
out of poverty. But this progress is fragile and unequal, 
and we still have work to do together to assure that our 
citizens can access the opportunities that they need in 
order to thrive in the twenty-first century.

Together, we have also worked to end a decade of 
war. Five years ago nearly 180,000 Americans were 
serving in harm’s way, and the war in Iraq was the 
dominant issue in our relationship with the rest of the 
world. Today, all of our troops have left Iraq. Next year an 
international coalition will end its war in Afghanistan, 
having achieved its mission of dismantling the core of 
Al Qaida that attacked us on 9/11.

For the United States, those new circumstances 
have also meant shifting away from a perpetual war 
footing. Beyond bringing our troops home we have 
limited the use of drones so that they target only those 
who pose a continuing imminent threat to the United 
States, when capture is not feasible and when there 
is a near certainty of no civilian casualties. We are 
transferring detainees to other countries and trying 
terrorists in courts of law, while working diligently to 
close the prison at Guantanamo Bay. Just as we have 
reviewed how we deploy our extraordinary military 
capabilities in a way that lives up to our ideals, we have 
begun to review the way that we gather intelligence, 
so that we properly balance the legitimate security 
concerns of our citizens and allies with the privacy 
concerns that all people share.

As a result of such work and cooperation with 
allies and partners, the world is more stable than it was 
five years ago. But even a glance at today’s headlines 
indicates that dangers remain. In Kenya, we have 
seen terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded 
shopping mall. Our hearts go out to the families of 
those who have been affected. In Pakistan, nearly 100 
people were recently killed by suicide bombers outside 
a church. In Iraq, killings and car bombs continue to be 
a terrible part of life.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida has splintered into regional 
networks and militias, which does not give them the 
capacity at this point to carry out attacks like 9/11 
but does pose serious threats to Governments and 
diplomats, businesses and civilians all across the globe. 
Just as significantly, the convulsions in the Middle East 
and North Africa have laid bare deep divisions within 
societies, as an old order is upended and people grapple 
with what is coming next. Peaceful movements have too 
often been answered by violence from those resisting 
change and from extremists trying to hijack change. 
Sectarian conflict has re-emerged, and the potential 
spread of weapons of mass destruction continues to cast 
a shadow over the pursuit of peace.

Nowhere have we seen those trends converge 
more powerfully than in Syria. There, peaceful 
protests against an authoritarian regime were met with 
repression and slaughter. In the face of such carnage, 
many retreated to their sectarian identities — Alawite 
and Sunni, Christian and Kurd — and the situation 
spiralled into civil war.

The international community recognized the stakes 
early on, but our response has not matched the scale of 
the challenge. Aid cannot keep pace with the suffering 
of the wounded and displaced. A peace process is 
stillborn. America and others have worked to bolster 
the moderate opposition, but extremist groups have still 
taken root to exploit the crisis.

Al-Assad’s traditional allies have propped him up, 
citing principles of sovereignty to shield his regime. 
On 21 August, the regime used chemical weapons in 
an attack that killed more than 1,000 people, including 
hundreds of children. Today, the crisis in Syria and the 
destabilization of the region goes to the heart of broader 
challenges that the international community must now 
confront. How should we respond to conflicts in the 
Middle East and North Africa — conflicts between 
countries, but also conflicts within them? How do we 
address the choice between standing callously by while 
children are subjected to nerve gas and embroiling 
ourselves in someone else’s civil war? What is the role of 
force in resolving disputes that threaten the stability of 
a region and undermine all basic standards of civilized 
conduct? And what is the role of the United Nations and 
international law in meeting cries for justice?



Today, I want to outline where the United States of 
America stands on those issues.

With respect to Syria, we believe that, as a starting 
point, the international community must enforce the ban 
on chemical weapons. When I stated my willingness to 
order a limited strike against the Al-Assad regime in 
response to its brazen use of chemical weapons, I did 
not do so lightly. I did so because I believe that it is 
in the national security interests of the United States 
and in the interest of the world to meaningfully enforce 
a prohibition whose origins are older than the United 
Nations itself. The ban against the use of chemical 
weapons, even in war, has been agreed to by 98 percent 
of humanity. It is strengthened by the searing memories 
of soldiers suffocated in the trenches, Jews slaughtered 
in gas chambers, Iranians poisoned in the many tens of 
thousands.

The evidence is overwhelming that the Al-Assad 
regime used such weapons on 21 August. United 
Nations inspectors gave a clear accounting of their 
findings that advanced rockets had fired large 
quantities of sarin gas at civilians. Those rockets were 
fired from a regime-controlled neighbourhood and 
landed in opposition neighbourhoods. It is an insult to 
human reason and to the legitimacy of this institution 
to suggest that anyone other than the regime carried out 
this attack.

I know that in the immediate aftermath of the attack 
there were those who questioned the legitimacy of even 
a limited strike in the absence of a clear mandate from 
the Security Council. But without a credible military 
threat, the Security Council had demonstrated no 
inclination to act at all. However, as I have discussed 
with President Putin for over a year, most recently in 
St. Petersburg, my preference has always been to work 
for a diplomatic resolution to this issue, and in the past 
several weeks, the United States, Russia and our allies 
have reached an agreement to place Syria’s chemical 
weapons under international control and then destroy 
them.

The Syrian Government took a first step by giving 
an accounting of its stockpiles. Now, there must be a 
strong Security Council resolution to verify that the 
Al-Assad regime is keeping its commitments, and there 
must be consequences if they fail to do so. If we cannot 
agree even on that, then that will show that the United 
Nations is incapable of enforcing the most basic of 
international laws. On the other hand, if we succeed, it 
will send a powerful message that the use of chemical 
weapons has no place in the twenty-first century and 
that this Organization means what it says.

Our agreement on chemical weapons should 
energize a larger diplomatic effort to reach a political 
settlement within Syria. I do not believe that military 
action by those within Syria or by external Powers can 
achieve a lasting peace, nor do I believe that America 
or any nation should determine who will lead Syria. 
That is for the Syrian people to decide. Nevertheless, a 
leader who has slaughtered his own citizens and gassed 
children to death cannot regain the legitimacy to lead 
a badly fractured country. The notion that Syria can 
return to a pre-war status quo is a fantasy. 

It is time for Russia and Iran to realize that insisting 
on Al-Assad’s rule will lead directly to the outcome that 
they fear — an increasingly violent space for extremists 
to operate in. In turn, those of us who continue to 
support the moderate opposition must persuade them 
that the Syrian people cannot afford a collapse of State 
institutions and that a political settlement cannot be 
reached without addressing the legitimate fears and 
concerns of Alawites and other minorities. 

We are committed to working this political track, 
and as we pursue a settlement, let us remember that 
this is not a zero-sum endeavour. We are no longer in 
a cold war. There is no great game to be won, nor does 
America have any interest in Syria beyond the well-
being of its people, the stability of its neighbours, the 
elimination of chemical weapons and ensuring that it 
does not become a safe haven for terrorists. I welcome 
the influence of all nations that can help bring about a 
peaceful resolution of Syria’s civil war. 

As we move the Geneva process forward, I 
urge all nations represented here to step up to meet 
the humanitarian needs in Syria and surrounding 
countries. America has committed over a billion dollars 
to that effort, and today I can announce that we will be 
providing an additional $340 million. No aid can take 
the place of a political resolution that gives the Syrian 
people the chance to begin rebuilding their country, but 
it can help desperate people survive.

What broader conclusions can be drawn from 
America’s policy towards Syria? I know that there are 
those who have been frustrated by our unwillingness 
to use our military might to depose Al-Assad and 
believe that a failure to do so indicates a weakening of 
America’s resolve in the region. Others have suggested 
that my willingness to direct even limited military 



strikes to deter the further use of chemical weapons 
shows that we have learned nothing from Iraq, and that 
America continues to seek control over the Middle East 
for our own purposes. The situation in Syria mirrors 
a contradiction that has persisted in the region for 
decades. The United States is chastised for meddling in 
the region and accused of having a hand in all manner 
of conspiracies. At the same time, the United States is 
blamed for failing to do enough to solve the region’s 
problems and for showing indifference toward suffering 
Muslim populations.

I realize that some of that is inevitable, given 
America’s role in the world, but such contradictory 
attitudes have a practical impact on the American 
people’s support for our involvement in the region 
and allow leaders in the region, and the international 
community sometimes, to avoid addressing difficult 
problems themselves. So let me take this opportunity 
to outline what has been United States policy towards 
the Middle East and North Africa and what will be my 
policy during the remainder of my presidency.

The United States of America is prepared to use 
all elements of our power, including military force, 
to secure these core interests in the region. We will 
confront external aggression against our allies and 
partners, as we did in the Gulf War. We will ensure 
the free flow of energy from the region to the world. 
Although America is steadily reducing its own 
dependence on imported oil, the world still depends 
upon the region’s energy supply, and a severe disruption 
could destabilize the entire global economy. We will 
dismantle terrorist networks that threaten our people. 
Wherever possible, we will build the capacity of our 
partners, respect the sovereignty of nations and work 
to address the root causes of terror, but when it is 
necessary to defend the United States against terrorist 
attack, we will take direct action. Finally, we will not 
tolerate the development or use of weapons of mass 
destruction. Just as we consider the use of chemical 
weapons in Syria to be a threat to our own national 
security, we reject the development of nuclear weapons 
that could trigger a nuclear arms race in the region and 
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.

Now, to say that those are America’s core interests 
is not to say that they are our only interests. We deeply 
believe that it is in our interest to see a Middle East and 
North Africa that are peaceful and prosperous, and we 
will continue to promote democracy, human rights and 
open markets, because we believe that those practices 
help achieve peace and prosperity. But I also believe 
that we can rarely achieve those objectives through 
unilateral American action, particularly military 
action. Iraq has shown us that democracy cannot 
simply be imposed by force. Rather, such objectives are 
best achieved when we partner with the international 
community and with the countries and peoples of the 
region.

So what does that mean going forward? In the near 
term, America’s diplomatic efforts will focus on two 
particular issues: Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons 
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. While those issues are 
not the cause of all of the region’s problems, they have 
been a major source of instability for far too long, and 
resolving them can help serve as a foundation for a 
broader peace.

The United States and Iran have been isolated 
from one another since the Islamic revolution of 1979. 
That mistrust has deep roots. Iranians have long 
complained of a history of United States interference 
in their affairs and of America’s role in overthrowing 
an Iranian Government during the cold war. On the 
other hand, Americans see an Iranian Government that 
has declared the United States an enemy and directly 
or through proxies has taken Americans hostage, killed 
United States troops and civilians and threatened our 
ally Israel with destruction.

I do not believe such a difficult history can be 
overcome overnight. The suspicion runs too deep. But 
I do believe that, if we can resolve the issue of Iran’s 
nuclear programme, that can serve as a major step down 
a long road towards a different relationship, one based 
on mutual interests and mutual respect.

Since I took office, I have made it clear, in letters 
to the Supreme Leader in Iran and, more recently, to 
President Rouhani, that America prefers to resolve its 
concerns over Iran’s nuclear programme peacefully, 
although we are determined to prevent Iran from 
developing a nuclear weapon. We are not seeking regime 
change, and we respect the right of the Iranian people 
to access peaceful nuclear energy. Instead, we insist 
that the Iranian Government meet its responsibilities 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and Security Council resolutions. Meanwhile, 
the Supreme Leader has issued a fatwa against the 
development of nuclear weapons, and President 
Rouhani has just recently reiterated that the Islamic 
Republic will never develop a nuclear weapon.



Those statements made by our respective 
Governments should offer the basis for a meaningful 
agreement. We should be able to achieve a resolution 
that respects the rights of the Iranian people while 
giving the world confidence that the Iranian programme 
is peaceful. But to succeed, conciliatory words will 
have to be matched by actions that are transparent and 
verifiable. After all, it is the Iranian Government’s 
choices that have led to the comprehensive sanctions 
that are currently in place. That is not simply an issue 
between the United States and Iran. The world has 
seen Iran evade its responsibilities in the past and has 
an abiding interest in making sure that Iran meets its 
obligations in future.

But I want to be clear. We are encouraged by the 
fact that President Rouhani received from the Iranian 
people a mandate to pursue a more moderate course. 
Given President Rouhani’s stated commitment to reach 
an agreement, I am directing John Kerry to pursue this 
effort with the Iranian Government, in close cooperation 
with the European Union, the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Russia and China.

The roadblocks may prove to be too great, but I 
firmly believe that the diplomatic path must be tested. 
For while the status quo will only deepen Iran’s isolation, 
Iran’s genuine commitment to go down a different path 
will be good for the region and the world, and will help 
the Iranian people meet their extraordinary potential in 
commerce and culture, in science and education.

We are also determined to resolve a conflict that 
goes back even further than our differences with 
Iran: the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis. 
I have made it clear that the United States will never 
compromise our commitment to Israel’s security, nor 
our support for its existence as a Jewish State. Earlier 
this year, in Jerusalem, I was inspired by young Israelis 
who stood up for the belief that peace was necessary, 
just and possible, and I believe that there is a growing 
recognition within Israel that the occupation of the West 
Bank is tearing at the democratic fabric of the Jewish 
State. But the children of Israel have the right to live in 
a world where the nations assembled in this body fully 
recognize their country and where we unequivocally 
reject those who fire rockets at their homes or incite 
others to hate them.

Likewise, the United States remains committed to 
the belief that the Palestinian people have a right to live 
in security and dignity in their own sovereign State. On 
the same trip, I had the opportunity to meet with young 
Palestinians in Ramallah whose ambition and incredible 
potential are matched only by the pain they feel in 
having no firm place in the community of nations. They 
are understandably cynical as to whether real progress 
will ever be made, and they are frustrated by their 
families enduring the daily indignity of occupation. 
But they, too, recognize that two States is the only real 
path to peace, because, just as the Palestinian people 
must not be displaced, the State of Israel is here to stay.

The time is now ripe for the entire international 
community to get behind the pursuit of peace. Already 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated a 
willingness to take significant political risks. President 
Abbas has put aside efforts to short-cut the pursuit 
of peace and come to the negotiating table. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu has released Palestinian prisoners 
and reaffirmed his commitment to a Palestinian State. 
Current talks are focused on final status issues of 
borders and security, refugees and Jerusalem.

So now the rest of us must be willing to take risks 
as well. Friends of Israel, including the United States, 
must recognize that Israel’s security as a Jewish and 
democratic State depends upon the realization of a 
Palestinian State, and we should say so clearly. Arab 
States, and those who have supported the Palestinians, 
must recognize that stability will be served only through 
a two-State solution and a secure Israel. All of us must 
recognize that peace will be a powerful tool to defeat 
extremists throughout the region and embolden those 
who are prepared to build a better future. Moreover, 
ties of trade and commerce between Israelis and Arabs 
could be an engine of growth and opportunity at a 
time when too many young people in the region are 
languishing without work. So let us emerge from the 
familiar corners of blame and prejudice. Let us support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are prepared to walk 
the difficult road to peace.

Real breakthroughs on these two issues — Iran’s 
nuclear programme and Israeli-Palestinian peace — would 
have a profound and positive impact on the entire Middle 
East and North Africa. But the current convulsions 
arising out of the Arab Spring remind us that a just and 
lasting peace cannot be measured only by agreements 
between nations. It must also be measured by our ability 
to resolve conflict and promote justice within nations. 
And by that measure, it is clear that all of us have a lot 
more work to do. 

When peaceful transitions began in Tunisia and 
Egypt, the entire world was filled with hope. And 



although the United States, like others, was struck by 
the speed of transition, and although we did not — and 
in fact could not — dictate events, we chose to support 
those who called for change. We did so based on the 
belief that while these transitions will be hard and take 
time, societies based upon democracy and openness 
and the dignity of the individual will ultimately be 
more stable, more prosperous and more peaceful. 

Over the last few years, particularly in Egypt, 
we have seen just how hard this transition will be. 
Mohammed Morsi was democratically elected, but 
proved unwilling or unable to govern in a way that was 
fully inclusive. The interim Government that replaced 
him responded to the desires of millions of Egyptians 
who believed the revolution had taken a wrong turn, but 
it, too, has made decisions inconsistent with inclusive 
democracy, through an emergency law and restrictions 
on the press, civil society and opposition parties.

Of course, America has been attacked by all sides 
of this internal conflict, simultaneously accused of 
supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and engineering 
its removal from power. In fact, the United States has 
purposely avoided choosing sides. Our overriding 
interest throughout these past few years has been to 
encourage a Government that legitimately reflects 
the will of the Egyptian people and recognizes true 
democracy as requiring a respect for minority rights, 
the rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, and a 
strong civil society.

That remains our interest today. And so, going 
forward, the United States will maintain a constructive 
relationship with the interim Government that promotes 
core interests like the Camp David Accords and counter-
terrorism. We will continue support in areas such as 
education that directly benefit the Egyptian people. 
But we have not proceeded with the delivery of certain 
military systems, and our support will depend upon 
Egypt’s progress in pursuing a more democratic path. 

Our approach to Egypt reflects a larger point: the 
United States will at times work with Governments 
that do not meet — at least in our view — the highest 
international expectations, but who work with us on our 
core interests. Nevertheless, we will not stop asserting 
principles that are consistent with our ideals, whether 
that means opposing the use of violence as a means 
of suppressing dissent or supporting the principles 
embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. We will reject the notion that those principles 
are simply Western exports, incompatible with Islam or 
the Arab world. We believe that they are the birthright 
of every person. And while we recognize that our 
influence will at times be limited, although we will be 
wary of efforts to impose democracy through military 
force, and although we will at times be accused of 
hypocrisy and inconsistency, we will be engaged in the 
region for the long haul. For the hard work of forging 
freedom and democracy is the task of a generation. 
That includes efforts to resolve sectarian tensions that 
continue to surface in places like Iraq, Bahrain and 
Syria. 

We understand that such long-standing issues 
cannot be solved by outsiders; they must be addressed 
by Muslim communities themselves. But we have seen 
grinding conflicts come to an end before, most recently 
in Northern Ireland, where Catholics and Protestants 
finally recognized that an endless cycle of conflict was 
causing both communities to fall behind a fast-moving 
world. And so we believe that those same sectarian 
conflicts can be overcome in the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

To summarize, the United States has a hard-earned 
humility when it comes to our ability to determine 
events inside other countries. The notion of American 
empire may be useful propaganda, but it is not borne 
out by America’s current policy or public opinion. 
Indeed, as recent debates within the United States over 
Syria clearly showed, the danger for the world is not an 
America that is too eager to immerse itself in the affairs 
of other countries or to take on every problem in the 
region as its own. The danger for the world is that the 
United States, after a decade of war, rightly concerned 
about issues back home and aware of the hostility 
that our engagement in the region has engendered 
throughout the Muslim world, may disengage, creating 
a vacuum of leadership that no other nation is ready to 
fill.

I believe that such disengagement would be a 
mistake. I believe that America must remain engaged 
for our own security, but I also believe that the world 
is better for it. Some may disagree, but I believe that 
America is exceptional, in part because we have shown 
a willingness, through the sacrifice of blood and 
treasure, to stand up not only for our own narrow self-
interest, but for the interests of all. I must be honest, 
though; we are far more likely to invest our energy 
in those countries that want to work with us, that 
invest in their people instead of in a corrupt few, and 
that embrace a vision of society where everyone can 



contribute — men and women, Shia or Sunni, Muslim, 
Christian or Jew. Because from Europe to Asia, from 
Africa to the Americas, nations that have persevered on 
a democratic path have emerged more prosperous, more 
peaceful and more invested in upholding our common 
security and our common humanity. And I believe that 
the same will hold true for the Arab world.

That leads me to a final point. There will be 
times when the breakdown of societies is so great and 
the violence against civilians so substantial, that the 
international community will be called upon to act. 
That will require new thinking and some very tough 
choices. While the United Nations was designed to 
prevent wars between States, increasingly we face 
the challenge of preventing slaughter within States. 
And those challenges will grow more pronounced 
as we are confronted with States that are fragile or 
failing — places where horrendous violence can put 
innocent men, women and children at risk with no hope 
of protection from their national institutions.

I have made it clear that even when America’s core 
interests are not directly threatened, we stand ready to 
do our part to prevent mass atrocities and protect basic 
human rights. But we cannot and should not bear that 
burden alone. In Mali, we supported both the French 
intervention that successfully pushed back Al-Qaida 
and the African forces who are keeping the peace. In 
East Africa, we are working with partners to bring the 
Lord’s Resistance Army to an end. And in Libya, when 
the Security Council provided a mandate to protect 
civilians, America joined a coalition that took action. 
Because of what we did there, countless lives were 
saved and a tyrant could not kill his way back to power.

I know that some now criticize the action in 
Libya as an object lesson. They point to the problems 
that the country now confronts — a democratically 
elected Government struggling to provide security; 
armed groups, in some places extremists, ruling parts 
of a fractured land — and these critics argue that any 
intervention to protect civilians is doomed to fail. Look 
at Libya. No one is more mindful of those problems 
than I am, for they resulted in the death of four 
outstanding United States citizens who were committed 
to the Libyan people, including Ambassador Chris 
Stevens — a man whose courageous efforts helped save 
the city of Benghazi. But does anyone truly believe that 
the situation in Libya would be better if Al-Qadhafi had 
been allowed to kill, imprison or brutalize his people 
into submission? It is far more likely that without 
international action, Libya would now be engulfed in 
civil war and bloodshed.

We live in a world of imperfect choices. Different 
nations will not agree on the need for action in every 
instance, and the principle of sovereignty is at the centre 
of our international order. But sovereignty cannot be 
a shield for tyrants to commit wanton murder or an 
excuse for the international community to turn a blind 
eye. While we need to be modest in our belief that we 
can remedy every evil, and while we need to be mindful 
that the world is full of unintended consequences, 
should we really accept the notion that the world is 
powerless in the face of a Rwanda or a Srebrenica? If 
that is the world that people want to live in, they should 
say so and reckon with the cold logic of mass graves.

I believe that we can embrace a different future. If 
we do not want to choose between inaction and war, we 
must get better — all of us — at the policies that prevent 
the breakdown of basic order through respect for the 
responsibilities of nations and the rights of individuals, 
through meaningful sanctions for those who break 
the rules, through dogged diplomacy that resolves the 
root causes of conflict and not merely its aftermath, 
and through development assistance that brings hope 
to the marginalized. And yes sometimes, all this will 
not be enough and there will be moments when the 
international community will need to acknowledge that 
the multilateral use of military force may be required to 
prevent the very worst from occurring. 

Ultimately, that is the international community 
that America seeks — one where nations do not covet 
the land or resources of other nations, but one in which 
we carry out the founding purpose of this institution 
and where we all take responsibility; a world in which 
the rules established out of the horrors of war can help 
us resolve conflicts peacefully and prevent the kind of 
wars that our forefathers fought; a world where human 
beings can live with dignity and meet their basic needs, 
whether they live in New York or Nairobi, in Peshawar 
or Damascus.

These are extraordinary times with extraordinary 
opportunities. Thanks to human progress, a child 
born anywhere on Earth today can do things that 
60 years ago would have been out of reach for the mass 
of humankind. I saw this in Africa, where nations 
moving beyond conflict are now poised to take off. 
America is with them: partnering to feed the hungry 
and to care for the sick and to bring power to places 
off the grid. I see it across the Pacific region, where 



hundreds of millions have been lifted out of poverty in 
a single generation. I see it in the faces of young people 
everywhere who can access the entire world with the 
click of a button and who are eager to join the cause of 
eradicating extreme poverty, combating climate change, 
starting businesses, expanding freedom, and leaving 
behind the old ideological battles of the past. That is 
what is happening in Asia and Africa, it is happening 
in Europe and the Americas. That is the future that the 
people of the Middle East and North Africa deserve as 
well, one where they can focus on opportunity, instead 
of on whether they will be killed or repressed because 
of who they are or what they believe. 

Time and again, nations and people have shown 
a capacity to change, to live up to humanity’s highest 
ideals, to choose a better history. Last month, I stood 
where 50 years ago Martin Luther King Jr. told America 
about his dream, at a time when many people of my 
race could not even vote for President. Earlier this year, 
I stood in the small cell where Nelson Mandela endured 
for decades, cut off from his own people and the world. 
Who are we to believe that today’s challenges cannot be 
overcome, when we have seen what changes the human 
spirit can bring? Who in this Hall can argue that the 
future belongs to those who seek to repress that spirit, 
rather than to those who seek to liberate it? 

I know what side of history I want the United States 
of America to be on. We are ready to meet tomorrow’s 
challenges with you, firm in the belief that all men 
and women are in fact created equal, each individual 
possessed with a dignity and inalienable rights that 
cannot be denied. That is why we look to the future 
not with fear, but with hope. That is why we remain 
convinced that this community of nations can deliver 
a more peaceful, prosperous, and just world to the next 
generation. 
As we gather near Ground 
Zero, site of the World Trade Center mass murder, I 
wish first to honour the victims of terrorism. I honour 
all victims everywhere, including those killed and 
wounded at the Westgate Shopping Mall in Nairobi.

Tragically, we lost two Canadians in Nairobi, including 
one of our diplomats. There is no more fitting venue to 
honour the life of Annemarie Desloges and her service 
than right here at the United Nations. The crime of 
terror is an assault on all people. In its wake, the human 
family is one — united in pain, mourning and our 
resolve that we will never allow evil to triumph.

At this moment of grief, the oneness of humankind is 
the theme of my remarks today.
Allow me to begin with an observation drawn from 
the Canadian experience. The province of Newfoundland 
and Labrador was the last province to join Canada, but 
it is the site of the earliest known European settlement 
in the New World. L’Anse aux Meadows is more than 
1,000 years old. We consider the province’s capital city, 
St. John’s, to be the oldest English settlement in North 
America, dating back to 1497.

The early Newfoundland settlements are the 
subject of significant archeological activity. Among the 
artifacts commonly found is a three-handled drinking 
mug known as a tyg. The three handles are designed 
for sharing. During the seventeenth century, it was 
common to share eating and drinking utensils. Further 
research reveals that the tyg is not unique to Canadian 
and English history. On the contrary, cups with three 
or more handles are common to many of the world’s 
cultures. Indeed, nearly three millennia ago, Homer 
wrote in the Iliad of a multi-handled mug. The tyg and 
its many counterparts around the world are tangible 
reminders not just of the fact that eating and drinking are 
social activities, but that, as long as human beings have 
inhabited this planet, sustenance and the necessaries of 
life have been community endeavours. Human beings 
share out of necessity. We cooperate to survive. We 
form communities because that is our natural state. As 
Cicero observed, we were born to unite with our fellow 
men and to join in community with the human race.

Animated by the same spirit of community, the 
Charter of the United Nations declares that our goals 
include to live together, to be neighbours and to unite. 
The very first words of the Charter of the United 
Nations make clear that the Organization is a body of, 
by and for human beings. It begins, “We the peoples 
of the United Nations” — not “We the countries” or 

“We the Governments” or “We the political leaders”, 
but “We the peoples”. That is an important reminder of 
why and on whose behalf we are all here today.

At the United Nations, Canada targets its efforts 
on securing tangible results for the human family. It 
is much more important to consider what the United 
Nations is achieving than how the United Nations 
arranges its affairs. Canada’s Government does not 
seek to have our values or our principled foreign policy 
validated by elites who would rather go along to get 
along. The billions who are hungry, or lack access to 
clean water, or are displaced, or cannot read and write 
do not care how many members sit on the Security 
Council. But they do need to know that their brothers 
and sisters in humankind will walk with them through 
the darkness.

Peace, prosperity and freedom are the conditions 
that have been sought by human communities from the 
beginning of recorded time: to live in peace, to live in 
prosperity, to live in freedom.

Of those priorities peace is the foremost objective of 
the United Nations. It is no surprise that the Charter 
of the United Nations mentions the word peace four 
dozen times. Sadly, peace the word is easier to locate 
than peace the condition. Since the moment the 
Organization was created, not a day has passed without 
the human family being pained by war somewhere on 
the planet. Almost always, the suffering is felt by the 
most vulnerable among us. Far too often, that involves 
women and violence.
In the context of war, rape and serious sexual 
violence are war crimes. I have met girls who were 
victims of that very war crime, and their stories are 
absolutely horrific. The war criminals involved must be 
identified, pursued, prosecuted and punished. Earlier 
this year, Canada and other Group of Eight nations 
agreed to treat sexual violence in conflict as a violation 
of the Geneva Conventions. I applaud the United 
Kingdom and Foreign Secretary William Hague for 
their work in this very important area. But he would be 
the first to acknowledge that the fight to eradicate this 
crime has been led by women, including the Special 
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual 
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura.

Tragically every year, millions of girls, some 
as young as nine years old, are forced into marriage. 
Since I began my remarks today, 100 children have 
been forced into marriage at a rate of 1,100 per hour, or 
more than 26,000 per day. The effects of early forced 
marriage are documented and beyond dispute. Early 
forced marriage harms health, halts education, destroys 
opportunity and enslaves women in a life of poverty. A 
young woman once recounted her wedding date. She 
remembered, “It was the day I left school”. No country 
is immune from this scourge.

This is a global problem — a problem for humankind. 
Forced marriage is rape — an act of violence against 
women. Early forced marriage is child rape — an act of 
violence against young girls. The practice is abhorrent 
and indefensible. We condemn it, even though some 
might prefer that we kept quiet. The discomfort of the 
public is of small concern, particularly in the context of 
a crime that calls to heaven for justice.
(spoke in English)
If the United Nations does not act to protect young 
girls, who will?
Another way to protect the vulnerable is to improve 
the health of mothers, newborns and children so that 
we can reduce the number of deaths. I would like to say 
how proud I am of Canadian Prime Minister Stephen 
Harper for having led a global effort — the Muskoka 
Initiative — to reduce maternal and infant mortality 
and to improve the health of mothers and children in 
the world’s poorest countries. That is about half of the 
world’s population, and all of its potential.

While those efforts, to eradicate sexual violence 
in conflict, to eliminate early forced marriage and to 
improve maternal and newborn health are essential, 
we must do more than react to crises. We must invest 
in opportunities for women and young girls. We must 
ensure that women participate fully in all parts of our 
society and in all the countries of the United Nations. 
That will help us build a stronger, more secure, more 
prosperous and more peaceful world. It is in every 
nation’s self-interest to ensure every young girl realizes 
her full potential. And it is from the perspective of the 
human family, one family, that we must address other 
threats to peace and security.

Among the most urgent crises remains the violence 
in Syria. Canada’s position is clear: we support the 



Syrian people, the innocent people caught up in this 
senseless violence and those who show great courage in 
working on their behalf. We will never support a brutal 
and illegitimate regime that has unleashed weapons of 
mass destruction on its own people. Nor will we tolerate 
extremism and terrorism as alternatives to Al-Assad’s 
tyranny.

The people of Canada have been generous in 
helping those most in need. When success is achieved, 
I believe that it is important to recognize it. The near-
impossible work of the World Food Programme must 
be applauded, and Canada has responded by being the 
second-largest single-country donor in the world. Its 
work in Syria is paramount and has not gone unnoticed. 
I also commend the work of the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in providing 
assistance to the refugees fleeing that terrible conflict, 
as well as the generosity of Syria’s neighbours in 
providing safe haven.

Canada joins the entire world in seeking a political 
resolution to the conflict. Canada supports a peaceful, 
democratic and pluralistic Syria that protects the rights 
of all communities. But let us not confuse a peaceful, 
negotiated outcome with equivocation or moral 
uncertainty. There can be no moral ambiguity about the 
use of chemical weapons, particularly against civilians.

Today, 30 September, is a dark reminder of the 
price of accommodation with evil. It is the seventy-
fifth anniversary of the Munich Agreement, by which 
Czechoslovakia’s freedom was sacrificed to appease 
the Nazi regime. The appeasers claimed they had won 
peace in our time. In fact, their abandoning of principle 
was a calamity for the world. Nobel Peace Prize winner 
Elie Wiesel, a Holocaust survivor who was imprisoned 
at Auschwitz, has been even blunter:

“Neutrality helps the oppressor, never the victim. 
Silence encourages the tormentor, never the 
tormented. Sometimes we must interfere. When 
human lives are endangered, when human dignity 
is in jeopardy, national borders and sensitivities 
become irrelevant.”
Just as we are not neutral or silent on the crimes 
being committed against the Syrian people, neither is 
Canada neutral on Israel’s right to exist and to defend 
itself. There can be no bargaining over Israel’s existence. 
While dialogue is a virtue, there can be no virtuous 
discussion with anyone wedded to Israel’s destruction. 
Today, the Jewish people are masters of their own fate, 
like most other nations, in their sovereign Jewish State. 
And like all other nations, Israel has the right to defend 
itself, by itself.

Canada fundamentally believes peace is achievable 
and that Palestinians and Israelis and their neighbours 
can live side by side in peace and security. We, like 
many nations, wish to see a prosperous Palestinian State 
living in peace with its Jewish neighbour. That is why, 
although at times we have fundamental differences 
on how statehood is achieved, Canada is providing 
significant assistance to build the institutions that are 
vital to the establishment of a viable future State. In the 
West Bank, Canada is contributing greatly to economic, 
security and justice initiatives.

Recent developments in negotiations between Israel 
and the Palestinian Authority are indeed encouraging. 
I want to salute the leadership and courage of the 
Israeli Prime Minister and the Palestinian Authority’s 
President. I commend United States Secretary of State 
John Kerry for his personal leadership in this area. We 
must all commit ourselves to this cause, united by the 
prospect of peace.

I look forward to the day when Israeli and 
Palestinian children can live side by side in peace and 
security in a Jewish and in a Palestinian State.

Dialogue is important, yes. But our dialogue must 
be a prelude to action, and action must mean achieving 
results. Action must mean making a difference. If we 
take the recent statements coming from the regime in 
Iran, some observers see encouraging signs, but sound 
bites do not remove threats to global security. Kind 
words, a smile and a charm offensive are not a substitute 
for real action. We will welcome and acknowledge 
reform, if and when it comes. By the following test 
we will know when genuine reform has occurred: has 
there been real, measurable, material improvement in 
the lives of the Iranian people and in the security of the 
world? Not yet. We will judge the regime on the basis 
of its actions and results.

The five permanent members of the Security 
Council plus Germany have had five rounds of formal 
negotiations with Iran in the past two years. While 
everyone says the meetings have been productive, the 
fact remains we have not seen any change in Iran’s 
actions. Next year, nothing would make Canada more 
pleased than to see a change in Iran’s nuclear ambitions, 
a change to its terrible human rights record and an end 



to its material support for terrorism, including for 
Hizbullah.

Now is the time for the global community to 
maintain tough sanctions against Iran so that the country 
takes a different path on its nuclear programme. The 
Iranian people want peace, and they are suffering great 
hardship because of their Government. Canada wants 
the Iranian people to be able to access a life of freedom 
and prosperity for themselves.

How do we as a human family achieve and maintain 
prosperity? We do so through free trade among open 
societies operating under transparent, consistent and 
fair rules. Canada continues to diversify its markets 
because it is a trading nation. We are aggressively 
pursuing free-trade agreements with other nations. 
Bounded by three oceans, with the second-largest land 
mass in the world, Canada is literally open to the world. 
We are both deepening existing economic relationships 
and building new ones. Whether with China, which 
is now Canada’s second-largest trading partner, or 
the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations, where Canadian trade and investment ties are 
dramatically increasing, or the Pacific Alliance, which 
provides new and exciting opportunities, or the European 
Union, where we are negotiating a comprehensive free 
trade agreement, Canada and Canadians are supporting 
market liberalization. In the process, ordinary lives are 
becoming enriched and entire societies stronger.

But the quest for prosperity must never come at the 
expense of our commitment to freedom. Prosperity is 
inextricably linked to peace. After all, those who lack 
security usually lack the means to provide for themselves 
and their families. With economic opportunity, a fruit 
vendor in Tunisia may not have felt compelled to end his 
life seeking the dignity to provide for his own family. A 
young man in Afghanistan may never feel compelled to 
join terrorist elements simply to raise his children and 
ensure that their lives are better than the one he lived.

I will always remember the 7-year old girl that I 
met at Zaatari refugee camp, in Jordan. Her parents 
had made the difficult decision to leave their home and 
to seek refuge in another country, braving hardship 
because they were motivated, like all parents, by the 
desire to keep their family safe. I asked the young girl 
how she was doing. With tears in her eyes, she said 
simply, “I do not like it here. I want to go home.” It was 
absolutely heartwrenching. And millions of people are 
in the same tragic position around the world — millions 
of members of the human family who cannot even begin 
to contemplate prosperity until a more basic need, their 
need for security, is addressed.

The global family will never achieve the prosperity 
that is our full potential unless we address the peace and 
security concerns that constrain human opportunity. 
Everyone has an interest in contributing to the solution, 
because peace and prosperity ultimately ensure the 
freedom of the individual. That is why we need the 
people of these United Nations gathered here to promote 
that freedom: freedom from oppression, freedom from 
discrimination, freedom to worship, to think, to speak, 
to love, to believe — freedom to be.

Human freedom can be exercised and, sadly, 
limited in far too many ways. Religious persecution 
continues in too many places. Since we gathered 
here last year, the world has witnessed bombings of 
mosques in Iraq and Pakistan and Catholic churches in 
Tanzania; attacks against Hindu, Buddhist and Muslim 
places of worship in Burma and Bangladesh; the bloody 
persecution of Christians in Syria; attacks on Coptic 
Christian churches in Egypt; attacks on a mosque 
and on a Catholic church in Sri Lanka; the detention 
of Sri Lankan Muslim leader Azad Sally; the murders 
of Catholic worshippers in Nigeria; and the Iranian 
regime’s ongoing persecution of the Baha’i.

Canada this year opened an Office of Religious 
Freedom. Its mandate is to promote freedom of religion 
and belief as a foreign policy priority, and to combat the 
enslavement into fear by those who seek to intimidate 
and undermine the right to worship freely in peace 
and in harmony. We reject the pernicious notion that 
human dignity can be sliced up, compartmentalized or 
compromised. In a pluralistic society, it is impossible 
to protect some human rights and freedoms while 
infringing others. All freedoms are rooted in the 
inherent dignity of human beings.

Whether the issue is religious freedom, sexual 
freedom, political freedom or any other freedom, 
some people ask: What business is it of ours? What 
interest do we have in events outside our borders? 
Our business is a shared humanity. Our interest is the 
dignity of humankind. Many assaults on human dignity 
have common roots. I refer to neo-fascist ideology 
masquerading in different forms, and the threat that it 
poses to individual freedom.

I spoke earlier of the anniversary of the Munich 
Agreement. What the signatories claimed as a triumph 



of practical politics was in fact a craven capitulation 
that betrayed human dignity and bankrupted the 
peace it purported to secure. It was wrong then to 
underestimate and to appease fascism, just as it is now 
to underestimate its modern incarnation. Extremism 
that subjugates human dignity and crushes individual 
freedom beneath rigid ideology must be opposed for 
what it is.

One year ago, the world lost the great Somali poet 
known as Gaarriye. Although his pen has been silenced, 
the inspiring words remain. He wrote: “And tell them 
this: our purpose is peace; our password ‘freedom’; 
our aim, equality; our way, the way of light.”. In 
other words, peace, prosperity and freedom — three 
universal human priorities. Like the three handles of a 
mug from which we all drink, they are three values that 
all humankind shares.

As I close, I cannot help but reflect on the three 
young girls, and my heart breaks for them: the child 
bride who said, “It was the day I left schoo.”; the young 
girl who was a victim of rape and sexual violence; the 
refugee who said, “I just want to go home”. We are not 
here to achieve results for Governments or political 
leaders. We are here to protect and defend those three 
girls and 7 billion other members of the human family. 
Let us remember that as we embark on discussions to 
shape a new global agenda, focusing on those most in 
need.

I am confident that everyone here feels the 
overwhelming honour and privilege it is to serve 
our people. It is not without great challenge and 
responsibility, but we all must stand up and deliver on 
that unique mandate for the people, for it is the people 
who expect nothing less.
On behalf of Canada, I congratulate you. Sir, on your election as President of this milestone session of the General Assembly. Your long career of devotion to the principles of the United Nations is recognized by this election, as is the vitality of the democratic institutions of the Government you represent.
On behalf of Canada, I join other spokesmen in expressing grief at the suffering caused by the massive earthquakes in Mexico. In connection with this tragedy we have seen arising spontaneously across national boundaries a rallying of forces to complement the Mexican Government's own extraordinary rescue operations. In times of such natural disasters the world truly becomes a neighborhood, and our people extend both their prayers and their practical help. We were pleased to join yesterday in the consensus on the resolution adopted in this Assembly expressing our common solidarity with the Mexican people.
It would be remiss of me as a Canadian if I did not sadly recall that last week Canada and the United Nations lost one of our greatest soldiers and statesmen, the late General E.L.M. Burns. Canada is particularly proud that he was the first commander of the united Nations Emergency Force and that he was a practical architect of peace-keeping. General Burns was also one of Canada's most thoughtful proponents of disarmament. His contributions truly embodied the best ideals of the Charter, we mourn his passing, but in reflecting on his dedication to the high principles and purposes of the united Nations we find an example that is inspiring for the years ahead.
At the age of 40 some people have what is termed a mid-life crisis, but this description certainly does not apply to the United Nations. There may be multiple crises in the world system today, but at the age of 40 the United Nations is a long way from mid-life. In fact, viewed in the long range of history the United Nations is still very much in its early years.
This perspective helps us to establish a more balanced and fair assessment of the United Nations in this important anniversary year. Optimists would like to see the United Nations as the flowering of a world that has come together. Pessimists decry it for not having brought peace. Realists recognize that the United Nations has persisted successfully in its global strategies for human security despite the divisions among nations.
In its first 40 years the United Nations has made an inestimable contribution to building a framework for a global system that responds to the technological interdependence and vulnerability of modern society. Technology has revealed the common qualities of the entire human family. Everyone wants to avoid the scourge of war. Everyone wants the opportunity for economic development. Everyone wants the guarantee of full human rights. The tackling of these common demands is the daily work of the United Nations.
If there are frailties in the united Nations, and there are, If there is some ineptitude, and there is, let us this year celebrate the United Nations endurance and accomplishments while resolving to improve its procedures.
In conflicts prevented, in disputes mediated, in the eradication of diseases, in world-wide development progress, in the saving of countless human lives, the United Nations has enriched human existence. It has done all this on a budget that is less than $1 per.year for every inhabitant of the planet. The United Nations should not need to be defended, but it does, and I emphasize that Canada not only defends the united Nations but will work to strengthen it and work to strengthen other parts of the multilateral system. This is the way towards the peace and the growth, the freedom and the justice, which the world needs.
The challenges facing the multilateral system reach beyond this institution. Questions are being raised about whether the States of the world will work together or whether nations will draw back to their individual devices. Whether the issue is debt or trade or culture, whether the nations are rich or poor, large or small, there is a renewal of doubt about the international system. Developing countries again this week in this Hall threatened to.abandon an international monetary system which they believe has abandoned them. Trade protectionist pressures are rampant, and dates are delayed for a new round of multilateral trade negotiations. Expenditures on arms increase; so does terrorism; so have regional conflicts.
If that continues we will all be the victims. Certainly a country like Canada is imperiled if nations cannot agree on the rules of trade or the relief of debt or the control of arms. Twenty-four years ago only 12 per cent of our gross national product was based on exports; today this figure has more than doubled. When the United Nations began Canada was relatively unaffected by violent sectarian disputes in other countries; today we, like the world, are targets of terrorists. Forty years ago drugs c technology or the economic policies of other countries had relatively little direct impact on Canada; today they can intrude directly on the life of every Canadian community. So it is with all communities, in all countries. In so small a modern world, we are exposed, inescapably, to common problems which none of us can solve alone. Instead of retreating inward, the world must reach out - not only to celebrate an anniversary but to cope with the inescapable reality of modern times.
Today, I renew the commitment made by successive Canadian Governments to the United Nations ever since its birth in the ashes of the Second World War. Prime Minister Mulroney has already personally reaffirmed to the Secretary-General during the letter's much appreciated official visit to Canada earlier this year, Canada's aspirations with regard to the United Nations. Next month, the Canadian Prime Minister will be meeting here with numerous other world leaders to proclaim yet again the importance of the United Nations.
This session of the General Assembly will thus provide us with an opportunity to recall the achievements of the last four decades: the virtually complete elimination of colonialism; the recognition of human rights at the international level; a commitment to general and complete disarmament; a program to strengthen the worId's\financial and commercial systems; a Convention on the Law of the Sea; treaties on a whole range of questions; important progress in the fight against illiteracy; and the promotion of the status of women.
We particularly welcome the consensus that emerged from the Nairobi Conference, which marked the end of the Decade for women. The nations of the world came to an agreement on a plan of action for the promotion of women, to be implemented over the next 15 years. Canadians are proud of the role played by our delegation in helping bring about a consensus, and our Government intends to define specific ways of carrying out the Nairobi strategies. It goes without saying that in the implementation of its programs and in its recruitment policies at senior levels the Organization must fully respect the objectives enunciated in the Forward-looking Strategies. At the present time women fill less than 6 per cent of senior professional posts, and it is beyond dispute that the United Nations still has much progress to make in the movement towards equity.
This session will be a time to pursue serious reform of the procedures of the United Nations. In the harsh Canadian winter houses that slip into disrepair are eventually abandoned precisely because they offer none of the protection they were designed to provide. The house of the United Nations must not be allowed to slip into disrepair, and we must note that disrepair is showing. Divisive political issues intrude too often into specialized agencies. The agenda of the Assembly and its Committees is overloaded regularly with ritual debates. Some rich countries refuse to pay their dues, while others threaten to reduce their share. The Secretary-General has courageously and repeatedly identified these weaknesses.
Changes and reforms are central to the existence of the United Nations. He must restore to this Assembly the authority given to it by the Charter. He must accordingly review our efforts and in a systematic fashion lay out for ourselves realizable goals and objectives.
He have sent Canadians to Cyprus, the Golan and other trouble-spots because we want the world system to work. What Canadians have helped secure in crisis we intend to preserve now. Delegations will be aware that Canada, with others, has been working in past months to devise and carry through a pragmatic and feasible set of measures with this purpose in mind, we will continue our co-operative efforts with all interested delegations in this search, which is made doubly urgent by the critical substantive issues before us, to which I now turn.
Surveying the landscape of world affairs on this fortieth anniversary, we find that no field is bleaker than that of arms control and disarmament. We must face the fact that not a single substantive agreement has come out of the multilateral arms-control process during the first half of the Second Disarmament Decade - not at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, not at the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna, not at the Stockholm Conference cm Confidence and Security Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe.
But I have come here not to lament but rather to offer the encouragement and support of Canada in building the climate of confidence necessary for disarmament agreements. No matter what the frustration, we must never give up in our determination to construct a world security system that depends on fewer arms, not more. If more political will is necessary, then let us assert that political will, particularly as we move into 1986, which has been designated the International Year of Peace.
In the complex process of arms control and disarmament, priorities must be set straight.
First, Canada believes that deep and verifiable reductions in the existing arsenals of nuclear weapons is the highest priority. Moving to lower levels of arms while preserving the stability of the balance at each successive stage of reduction is the only practical way to make progress. Thus we give our full support to the bilateral negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union now taking place in Geneva. The summit meeting between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev in 55 days time provides an opportunity to chart a new course for the future leading to practical steps to unblock the disarmament impasse.
Secondly, for Canada the achievement of a comprehensive test-ban treaty continues to be a fundamental and abiding objective. Our aim is to stop all nuclear testing.
Thirdly, the early conclusion of a chemical weapons treaty is now within reach in the Conference on Disarmament.
Fourthly, the prevention of an arms race in outer space is now on the world agenda.
Thus we know where we are going in arms-control and disarmament measures. The Final Document of the first special session on disarmament, in 1978, should continue to be our guide. The remarkable consensus achieved by the world community on that occasion must again be renewed as we look towards the third special session on disarmament.
The success of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which completed its business last Saturday in Geneva, represents an important step forward. States participating in the Conference reaffirmed, on the basis of a consensus, the viability and the vitality of that Treaty, to which has been endorsed by 130 nations have acceded and which prevents the spread of nuclear weapons while at the same time bringing to the whole
international community the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The spirit of international co-operation that characterized the review of the Non-Proliferation Treaty showed that the multilateral process can and does contribute effectively to the strengthening of world security.
Canada will continue to play an active role in all multilateral bodies and will contribute further to the building of confidence. In this respect Canada has drawn up a program of action for the second part of the current Disarmament Decade. By means of this program we shall intensify our work in the sphere of the improvement of the verification procedures necessary to ensure compliance with agreements entered into.
In order to advance the work on verification of compliance with a complete ban on nuclear tests we shall strengthen our capacity for analysis in seismic research, we shall improve our seismic research facilities in northern Canada and enhance our capacity to distinguish minor earthquakes from underground nuclear tests.
Within the framework of this program of action we shall be conducting practical studies on the use of chemical weapons. We shall submit these studies to the United Nations and also make Canadian experts available to the Organization for inquiries into allegations of the use of chemical weapons.
Moreover we shall work towards the conclusion of a multilateral agreement prohibiting the possession and use of radiological weapons. I appeal to the United States and the Soviet Union to conclude an effective, verifiable treaty prohibiting radiological weapons. Canada is prepared to sign such a treaty immediately.
The Canadian delegation will be reporting to the First Committee on the day-to-day efforts made by Canada to lay a foundation for lasting treaties.
The relationship between disarmament and development must also be considered constructively and in greater depth. The current level of military expenditures, now in the region of a trillion dollars, at a time when many parts of the world are experiencing destitution, poverty and famine is unacceptable. The Canadian people, which enjoys a wide representation in an increasingly broad network of non-governmental organizations, is particularly sensitive to this imbalance. It aspires to the establishment of genuine human security, characterized by increasing food stocks and a decline in military arsenals.
Another important lesson of our 40 years' experience concerns economic growth. We now know that the well-being of everyone depends on the financial, trade and other linkages among our economies. We understand better the challenges of the global market place. And we appreciate better the critical role that developing countries play in the expansion of the world economy.
The partnership between developed and developing countries - a partnership of shared responsibilities and commitments - must be enhanced. Canada is very pleased that consensus agreement was reached yesterday, in the Committee to Review and Appraise the International Development Strategy, on a statement of agreed conclusions. This is a significant step. It reflects the serious effort made by all concerned to express the current economic realities in common language. We believe it augurs well for future co-operation.
When we look at the problems of the developing world, no case is more poignant than the suffering of sub-Saharan Africa. The global humanitarian response to the crisis in Africa has succeeded in saving thousands, and perhaps millions, of lives, but the experience of this crisis has also identified longer-term challenges.
Relief is not enough. Action for permanent development - in partnership with African nations - is essential. African Governments must resolve to give priority to the agricultural sector and to unleash the productive forces in their own societies. But this effort must be matched by a real and sustained commitment by developed nations and indeed by the entire international community. The African crisis will not end until the valiant efforts to relieve the tragedy of today are buttressed by a sustained commitment to building the Africa of tomorrow.
The heavy external debt, which afflicts so many countries, is another crippling burden in the developing world. Some progress has been achieved in dealing with the debt situation, thanks to co-operation among creditor Governments, debtor countries, commercial banks, and international institutions. The strategy of adjustment, financing, and rescheduling has demonstrated an impressive flexibility in helping debtors. But, obviously, more adaptation is needed to meet the special needs of debtor nations.
Deliberations in the United Nations help in fostering a better understanding of these economic problems and further the activities of various international institutions dealing with them. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank have played a key role in this regard. We should ensure that they can and will continue to do so, taking due account of the particular problems facing individual States. The strains facing the multilateral economic system and facing its leading institutions must be dealt with. Bilateral relations between countries on the one hand, and the multilateral system on the other, ought to be mutually complementary and reinforcing.
Similarly, protectionism, which threatens the prosperity of developed and developing countries alike, must be resisted. The industrialized countries must keep their markets open to third-world products if the developing countries are to maintain the export earnings necessary to service their external debt and to improve living standards. All of us will lose if our borders close. All therefore have an important stake in ensuring that the multilateral trading system remains open and health/. That is why Canada has been at the forefront in calling for a new round of multilateral trade negotiations, and why we have been working to liberalize trade and resist protectionism in many other ways'.
By joining in the preparations for a new trade round now, the developing countries can be joint architects of a revitalized General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) system. Canada is anxious to work with developing countries to identify areas of common interest which could be pursued in the next round.
Economic development is critical, but its benefits will be fully realized and enjoyed only if the Member states of the United Nations co-operate together in a concerted plan to tackle the preeminent social and human rights issues of our day.
Illicit trafficking and abuse of narcotics and other drugs is a major social challenge on every continent.
I am pleased that the United Nations has set out a plan of action in this vital field. Last year, Canada joined others in co-sponsoring a resolution which set in motion the drafting of a new convention to combat the illicit drug trade. It constitutes a key element in current international efforts to deal with this social problem. The convention must aim at strengthening enforcement measures against illicit drug trafficking.
We welcome the Secretary-General's proposal for the convening of a drug conference in 1987 at the ministerial level. We commend the link it makes between initiatives needed to cut down on the supply of illicit drugs and the steps required to reduce demand. We will be working actively with other interested countries to develop a resolution to carry this idea further forward at this session.
Forty years ago, the Charter made the rights and freedoms of all persona a matter of legitimate concern to the whole international community. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights itself is nearly four decades old. Yet our work has only just begun. As the Secretary-General notes in his current report:
'Massive violations of human rights continue to take place, often of tragic proportions.' 
We must, therefore, expand the frontiers of United Nations activities in the human rights field. This will entail completing the work on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, ensuring that the new Convention against torture is properly implemented, extending the Commission's program of advisory services, encouraging other countries to offer technical assistance in the human rights field, assisting the Working Group on the Disappeared. Moreover, the United Nations must continue to focus attention on the fate of prisoners of conscience, ensure that the disabled are not deprived of their basic rights, protect the special interests of indigenous populations around the world, and take steps to protect the rights of those who themselves promote human rights.
I cannot fail to take note of the wide range of political confrontation and open warfare that so lamentably haunts this planet from Asia, to Central America to the Middle East, we will have ample opportunity to approach these issues as this session of the Assembly goes about its business. In my view, however, and in the view of my Government, South Africa presents a situation which challenges the world community like no other. It is the most striking example today of what can happen to a country when human rights are systematically violated and abused. It is not the only country where discrimination takes place on the basis of race; much less is it the only country to deny the great majority of citizens access to the political process.
But South Africa is the only country where racial discrimination is a first principle of State policy. Human rights violations are written into the Constitution, and the majority are denied their political rights because of the color of their skin, we are all cast down by the lives lost and the people injured, by the repressive measures undertaken by the authorities and by the harsh and callous pressure applied to those who campaign against apartheid.
The pity and the shame is that this rich country of enormous human and natural potential could contribute so much to the continent of which it is a part. Instead, its unconscionable violation of fundamental human rights does not stop at its borders.
But the South Africa monolith has been shaken. Demonstrations, strikes and acts of resistance against the regime are widespread. Economics have proved to be an engine of change. A wave of disinvestment has taken place and the exchange rate on the rand has dropped significantly.
The message in all of this is clear: 40 years after the United Nations Charter came into existence and 35 years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was promulgated, change must come to South Africa, apartheid must be dismantled. Measures to make all South Africans equal within their State must be pursued to the end.
Nor can we ignore Namibia. Not only does South Africa hold that Territory in gross violation of United Nations wishes and international law and use it as a springboard for attack on its neighbors but it perpetuates its oppressive practices in that emergent land. Such contempt and continued denial of justice cannot be tolerated by the international community. The community of nations must continue to pressure South Africa to change its offensive policies.
Canada has acted steadily and deliberately to add to the pressure for change. We hope that the response of South Africa will allow economic and diplomatic relations between our two countries to continue, but that will require real progress against apartheid. We are consulting and co-operating with our friends in the Commonwealth, in the front-line States and elsewhere to find the most effective means to end a system which is repugnant to Canadians.
Yet another growing violation of civilized conduct, terrorism, must be dealt with in more detail by the United nations. As we Canadians have learned in the past year, terrorism is a menace to which no nation is immune. At this Assembly we shall actively seek new ways, through new international instruments if necessary, to deal effectively with this scourge. Canada, already a party to all the international air security conventions, will ratify the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages. We were heartened that the Seventh united Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders supported the efforts of the International Civil Aviation Organization to promote universal acceptance of and strict compliance with international air security conventions. The international community has shown that it has the political will to act.
Finally, the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations must be remembered as a time of a united call for the peace that will come from effective disarmament and economic development for all.
An organization that embodies the cry to peace of 'We, the peoples of the United Nations' cannot be irrelevant now or 40 years from now. The gravity of the threat to global survival must be matched by the intensity of our efforts to build the conditions for lasting peace. The peoples of the United Nations have the right to expect to find their hopes fulfilled by the actions of every Government that comes to this rostrum.
We know that the challenges are huge; we will not be daunted by them. We know that the problems are infinite; we will not be intimidated by their complexity. We know that international relationships are frayed; we will not be deterred in our efforts for their repair.
To put it simply, Canada, along with all other sovereign countries of good faith, will use the United Nations to pursue indomitably the quest for peace, security and social justice.
Let me start by joining the President of Brazil in conveying to the people and Government of Mexico our deep sympathy over the devastation wrought by earthquakes and our solidarity with them as they work to recover and rebuild. We admire the way the Government and people of Mexico are dealing with their problem. For our part, we a?.9 responding rapidly to Mexico's request for assistance with medicine, blankets and equipment to help in removing rubble, searching for survivors and fighting fires. But these are Mexico's short-term needs. The long-range impact and cost of the earthquakes are still being determined, but one thing is clear - they will be enormous. Here, too, the United States is prepared to respond to Mexico's plight.

As I look at the devastation - and, perhaps, as you do on your television screens and you see the pictures, you cannot help but be struck by the thought that Mexico City in some ways looks war-torn. Of course, an earthquake is not a man-made event. When the earth shook in Mexico there was nothing anyone could do about it. But our task here at the United Nations is to see to it that man does not cause the earth to shake. So let us devote ourselves to the cause of peace and freedom.
Three years ago, when I addressed this body for the first time, I stressed the need for realism. There is probably no other quality so appropriate and necessary for this Organization. But realism does not mean cynicism, or even pessimism. It means a clear-sighted appreciation of the opportunities we face, as well as of the obvious problems. It means remembering the many challenges that the world community has overcome, and drawing lessons from that. It means understanding that idealism and the yearning for human betterment are themselves part of reality, and thus have enormous practical significance.
The founding fathers of the United Nations are sometimes accused of naive Utopianism. Supposedly they ignored the realities of power politics in attempting to create a global system of collective security. I doubt it. The men and women who set up this Organization 40 years ago were among the great statesmen of the century. They drafted the Charter as a set of standards for international conduct - knowing full well that the world's nations probably would fall short of those standards, but knowing also that the setting of high goals is a necessary precondition to their pursuit and attainment.
The lofty goals of the Charter have a concrete, practical meaning today. They not only point the way to a better world? they reflect some of the most powerful currents at work in the contemporary world. The striving for justice, freedom, progress and peace is an ever-present and powerful reality that is today, more than ever, impressing itself on international politics.
Our political thinking must catch up to this reality. The policies of nations must adapt to this basic human striving. This Organization, too, must adapt to reality; it cannot afford to consume itself in political warfare and unrealistic posturing. There is work to be done. Let us do it.
The world community faces enormous challenges in three areas: in satisfying mankind's yearning for democracy, freedom and justice; in preserving and perfecting global peace and stability; and in spreading economic prosperity and progress.
First, the guest for democracy and freedom. Since the end of the Second World War, modern communication has opened the eyes of most of the world's peoples to the realization that they do not have to live their lives in poverty and despair; that, on the contrary, the blessings of prosperity and liberty known in the past only by a relative few can be theirs as well. The ideals for which the war was fought, and the spread of democracy and of prosperity in the industrialized world since, created an explosion of expectations.
The result has been in recent years a revolution of democratic aspirations sweeping the world. At the time of the San Francisco Conference in 1945, most of the nations represented in this hall today were not independent States but possessions - colonies of European empires. The vast number of languages, cultures and traditions that I can now see before me testify to the revolution in the world order. The old empires eventually had to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence.
Much of the conflict in the world today stems from the refusal of some governments to accept the reality that the aspirations of people for democracy and freedom simply cannot be suppressed for ever by force.
 In South Africa, these aspirations on the part of the bLack majority have as never before, drawn global attention and support. Change is inevitable. The issue is not whether apartheid is to be dismantled, but how and when. And then, what replaces it: race war, bloodbath, and new forms of injustice? Or political accommodation and racial coexistence in a just society? The outcome depends on whether and how quickly the South African Government can accept the new reality, and on whether men and women of peace on both sides can seize the opportunity before it is too late.

This such is clear; there must be negotiation among South Africans of all races on constitutional reform. True peace will come only when the Government negotiates with, rather than locks up, representative black leaders. The violence will end only when 311 parties begin a mutual search for a just system of government.
One area where the future has brightened in the past five years as the aspirations of the people to democracy have been met in country after country is Latin America - as President Sarney just said so eloquently. In contrast to only 30 per cent in 1979, today more than 90 per cent of the people of Latin America live under Governments that are either democratic or clearly on the road to democracy.
In Central America, El Salvador, under the courageous leadership of President Duarte, has shown that democracy can take root and thrive even in the most difficult terrain. Its citizens have braved extremist violence to participate overwhelmingly in four free elections since 1982. Their President's current personal ordeal only serves to underscore the sacrifices thousands of Salvadorians continue to make as they fight to realize the ideals of the United Nations Charter. For this commitment they should be applauded by all Members. Ironically, El Salvador is today the only democracy subject to the scrutiny of a special rapporteur for human rights.
Among El Salvador's neighbors, Costa Rica has long been the region's beacon of representative government; Honduras is about to replace one freely-elected government with another; and Guatemala is about to join them as a democratic nation with the election of a president in November. These developments should enhance regional co-operation for economic development, which the United States supports through our Caribbean Basin initiative and President Reagan's initiative for peace, development and democracy.

But regional peace in Central America is threatened by the rulers of Nicaragua and their Soviet and Cuban allies. Behind a cloak of democratic rhetoric, the Nicaraguan communists have betrayed the 1979 revolution and embarked upon a course of tyranny at home and subversion against their neighbors. Brave Nicaraguans are fighting to restore the hope for freedom in their country and the other nations of the region are working together in collective self-defense against Nicaraguan aggression.
How can this crisis be resolved? The Central American nations, together with their nearest neighbors, the members of the Contadora Group, have subscribed to a document of 21 objectives. These include non-interference in the affairs of one's neighbors, serious dialog with domestic opposition groups, free elections and democracy in each country, the removal of foreign military personnel and a reduction of armaments. My Government supports a verifiable treaty based on full and simultaneous implementation of the 21 objectives. We welcome the resumption of talks next month in Panama and hope they lead to a final agreement. Contadora is the best forum for pursuing a settlement.
In El Salvador, President Duarte, true to his pledge to the Assembly last year, has pursued a dialog with the guerrilla opposition. Would that the rulers of Nicaragua would make,- and honor, a similar pledge to the Assembly this year. In San Jose on 1 March of this year the Nicaraguan democratic resistance called for internal dialog, moderated by the Roman Catholic Church, to end the killing.
The people of the region are waiting for a positive answer from the rulers of Nicaragua. Can it be that, never having been chosen by their people in a truly free election, they lack the confidence to face opponents they cannot silence or lock up, as they have so many others? The united Nicaraguan opposition deserves to participate in Nicaraguan political life and has an important role to play in the diplomatic process. Regional peace will not come without it.
The reality of democratic revolution is also demonstrated by the rise of national liberation movements against communist colonialism: in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola and other lands where, as in Nicaragua, people have organized in resistance to tyranny. Unlike the old European empires that came to accept the post-war reality of self-determination and national independence, the new colonialists are swimming against the tide of history. They are doomed to fail.
In Afghanistan the almost six-year-old Soviet invasion has inflicted untold suffering on a people whose will to resist and to free themselves from a pitiless tyranny cannot be broken. Hundreds of thousands of Afghans are dead or maimed, millions more make up the largest refugee population in the world and countless villages, schools and farms lie in ruins. Nowhere in the world has the carnage wrought by Soviet imperialism been greater than in Afghanistan and nowhere has the resistance been more determined and courageous.
The withdrawal of Soviet forces, as the General Assembly has noted on six occasions, would lead to solution of the Afghanistan problem. A solution must also encompass restoration of the country's independence and non-aligned status, self-determination for the Afghan people and the return in safety and honor of the more than 3 million refugees, unless and until the Soviet Union permits such a solution the national liberation struggle in Afghanistan will continue, the world-wide effort to provide succor to a beleaguered people will go forward and Soviet protestations of peace on this and other issues will not ring true. My Government, together with others concerned, stands ready to implement a just solution to this problem.
Cambodia, as we all know, stands as one of the worst examples in history of a totalitarian ideology carried to its bloodiest extreme. Today, courageous freedom fighters under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann struggle to reclaim their country. He continue to support the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) program for a peaceful solution; Vietnamese forces must withdraw completely, and Cambodia's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be restored under a Government chosen in free elections.
In other countries where the apparatus of repression is well developed, countless thousands of men and women wage private struggles for freedom, armed only with their consciences and their courage. Some suffer for their political convictions, others for their religious beliefs: solidarity trade unionists in Poland; Jews, Baptists, Roman Catholics, Pentecostalists and others in the Soviet Union; Baha is in Iran. With all the men and arms at their disposal, what are these Governments afraid of?
These brave and often nameless prisoners of conscience struggle to achieve for men and women in every corner of the world the promises of this Organization. He are with them, and we call on all States as Members of this body to honor their solemn commitments. As Thomas Jefferson once said,
'The opinions of men and women are not the rightful object of any Government, anywhere.'
The quest for peace continue on many fronts. And for all the obstacles confronting it, there are examples of success - such as the treaty on Antarctica, which recently marked a quarter century of effective international co-operation. We can learn from problems overcome as we tackle the formidable problems ahead.
In the Middle Bast, 10 or 15 years ago, peace between Israel and any Arab State seemed a remote, if not impossible, dream. Finally, after untold suffering and four wars, a courageous leader, Anwar El-Sadat, abandoned the old ways of thinking and took the step no other Arab leader had been willing or prepared even to contemplate: he recognized that the State of Israel was here to stay and, with Prime Minister Begin, vowed there would be no more wars. Peace and normal relations were established, and the Sinai was returned.
The past year has seen major efforts toward new negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors. The United States is committed and engaged in support of those efforts, in accordance with President Reagan's initiative of three years ago. Yet the lesson of the past is clear: progress can be achieved only through direct negotiations, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). There is no other way, and evasion of this reality only prolongs suffering and heightens dangers. Nothing positive will ever be achieved by chasing illusions of so-called armed struggle; but much can be accomplished by parties who are committed to peace and engaged in serious dialog. The moment is at hand - this year - to make major progress and to begin direct negotiations.
To the east, we have the continuing failure of reason to prevail and end the devastating war between Iran and Iraq. Prolonged by Iran's refusal to come to terms with its inability to achieve victory, this war has now entered its fifth year, with no end in sight. We again call on both parties to negotiate an end to the fighting.

On the Korean peninsula we see the first tentative steps being taken to get away from the mode of thinking that has characterized the pa at years. A decade ago, there seemed little hope for a significant reduction of tension. Yet last year both Koreas began a multifaceted, direct dialog, which the United States supports as the key to a solution. While the animosities of a lifetime are not resolved quickly, a start has been made. We also believe that membership in the United Nations for both the Republic of Korea and North Korea, in accordance with the principle of universality, would help reduce tensions.
Perhaps the most dramatic problem that requires new ways of thinking is international State-sponsored terrorism. Terrorism is every bit as much a form of war against a nation's interests and values as a full-scale armed attack. And it is a weapon wielded particularly against innocent civilians, against free nations, against democracy, against moderation and against peaceful solutions. It is an affront to everything the United Nations stands for.
Progress has been made against the terrorist threat through co-operation in the United Nations system. Many nations subscribe to The Hague, Tokyo and Montreal Conventions to make air travel safer and to suppress hijacking and sabotage. Progress has also been made in providing protection for diplomats, and some nations have agreed on how to handle hostage situations. Just this month, participants at the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan, adopted a strong, broad-ranging resolution urging all States to adhere to these agreements and to strengthen international actions against terrorism.
Much more remains to be done. The United States and other nations, for example, are working with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to improve standards of security. Over this past year, so far 90 potential terrorist actions against United States facilities or citizens have been deterred or prevented. But the fight has only begun, and it cannot be won by one Government alone. The civilized world must put the terrorists and their supporters on notice: we will defend ourselves in any and every way we can.
The reality of the nuclear age has spelled the United States and the Soviet Union to engage in a dialog, of varying intensity, for the past 40 years. This dialog has been an unprecedented attempt by two rivals to manage their competition and avert war. We know that we share a responsibility for maintaining peace, not just for our peoples, but for all the earth's peoples.
Despite all the difficulties, let us remember what has been accomplished. After the two most destructive wars in history, the super-Powers, joined with others, have averted world war for four decades. We have had some success in limiting nuclear testing. Working together with other nations since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968, we have succeeded in restricting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Twenty years ago it was conventional wisdom that there would be 15 to 25 nuclear-weapon States by today; yet the number of States acknowledged to possess nuclear weapons has held at five for the past 20 years. The United States remains committed to all the goals of the Treaty, whose Third Review Conference just concluded successfully in Geneva. And the United States and the Soviet Union have taken practical steps to avoid conflict. Our navies have long agreed to work together to prevent incidents at sea. And we have set up and improved the 'hot line' for crisis communications.
In the nuclear and space arms talks in Geneva, the United States has advanced far-reaching proposals: a reduction by almost one-half in the most destabilizing weapons, strategic ballistic missile warheads, and the elimination of the whole class of the United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear forces missiles worldwide, all leading ultimately to the complete elimination of nuclear arms. We repeatedly have stressed our readiness for give and take and to
 consider alternative proposals. Each of our proposals has been followed up by further attempts to find common ground with the Soviet Union. He have offered trade-offs and have made clear our readiness to take account of legitimate Soviet concerns to obtain an agreement that would enhance strategic stability and strengthen deterrence..
Progress at Geneva has been slow. Thus far the Soviet Union has not negotiated with the responsiveness that the talks require. None the less, our determination to reach an equitable agreement has not wavered.
In this spirit, President Reagan last June decided to continue our policy of taking no action that would undercut the limits of previous agreements, to the extent the Soviet Union shows comparable restraint. Despite serious reservations about those agreements, and serious concerns about the Soviet record of non-compliance.', the President made this decision to foster a climate of truly mutual restraint to facilitate progress in arms control.
While the most direct path to a safer world is through equitable, verifiable reductions, we also see value in verifiable limitations on nuclear testing. For that reason, President Reagan, in his speech to this body last year, proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union exchange visits of experts at test sites to measure directly the yields of nuclear-weapon test. This would significantly improve confidence in the verifiability of proposed treaty limits on underground testing. The Soviet Union rejected this offer. Nevertheless, last July, the President issued an unconditional invitation for a Soviet team to observe and measure a nuclear test at the Nevada Test Site. We again call on the Soviet Union to take up this offer, which is a concrete, positive step toward verifiable restrictions on nuclear testing.
 When the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty was signed in 1972 it was assumed that tight limits on defensive systems would make possible real reductions in strategic offensive arms. But the Soviet Union has never agreed to any meaningful reductions in offensive nuclear arms. Instead, it has continued an unprecedented military build-up - particularly in heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles with a first-strike capability - which is eroding the basis on which deterrence has rested for decades. The strategy of reliance on offensive retaliation to preserve deterrence and prevent war thus is being called into question by Soviet actions.
The answer is, first, for us both to agree that strategically significant, verifiable reductions in the numbers and destructive potential of offensive weapons. But there are additional ways to redress the problem. President Reagan has directed our scientists and engineers to examine, in the light of new technologies and fully in accord with the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty - the feasibility of defense against ballistic-missile attack. Strategic defense could give our children and grandchildren a safer world. We would continue to rely on deterrence to prevent war, but deterrence would be based more on denying success to a potential attacker and less on threatening massive mutual destruction. Such a means of deterrence should be safer and more stable. Our goal is not to achieve superiority but to add to the security of both sides. As former Soviet Premier Kosygin said, an anti-missile system 'is intended not for killing people but for saving human lives'. The Soviet Premier was right.
We want to co-operate with the Soviet union in making progress on these most important of all issues. Progress requires - it demands - good will, realism and honesty. Behind the curtain that encloses Soviet society, free from the open debate we see in the West, a major strategic defense program has proceeded for decades. The current Soviet leaders know that. In the past 20 years the
 Soviet Union has spent about as much on strategic defense as on its offensive nuclear forces. The Soviets know that. The Soviets have the world's most active military space program, last year conducting about 100 space launches, some 80 per cent of which were purely military in nature, compared to a total of about 20 United States space launches. The Soviets know that, too. They deploy the world's only anti-ballistic-missile system, whose nuclear-armed interceptors and other components are undergoing extensive modernization. They are researching many of the same new technologies as we, and are ahead in some. And the Soviet Union has the world's only extensively tested and fully operational anti-satellite system. The Soviet leaders know full well their own efforts in these fields. Their propaganda about American programs is blatantly one-sided and not to be taken seriously.
So let us get down to real business, with the seriousness the subject deserves, and let us do so in the quiet of the negotiating room, where we can really make progress cm narrowing our differences.
Progress needs to be made in other arms-control areas as well. Restraints on chemical and biological weapons have eroded in recent years as international agreements have been violated by the Soviet Union and others. In April 1984 the United States proposed a comprehensive treaty for a global ban on chemical weapons. We will again introduce a draft resolution on chemical weapons in the First Committee. We must have talks on serious, verifiable proposals.
To reduce the risk of conflict through miscalculation we and our Atlantic allies have proposed significant confidence- and security-building measures at the Conference on Disarmament in Europe. To enhance security in Central Europe we have repeatedly sought ways to move the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna forward.
In sum, the United States and the Soviet Union now have a historic opportunity to reduce the risk of war. President Reagan looks forward to his meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in November. We have a long agenda. The United States is working hard to make it a productive meeting and we want the meeting itself to give a further impetus to the wide-ranging dialog on which we are already embarked. Soviet acts of good faith and willingness to reach fair agreements will be more than matched on the American side.
Just as there is a democratic revolution in the world today, so there is also a revolution in economic thinking. Mankind is moving towards an ever greater recognition of the inescapable tie between freedom and economic progress. Command economies, in spite of all their pretensions, have not done very well in liberating people from poverty. In reality, they have served as instruments of power for the few rather than of hope for the many. Expectations of material progress and prosperity have been fulfilled in countries whose Governments have applied reason and fresh thinking to their problems, learning from experience rather than slavishly Allowing outworn dogma. The new way of thinking - economic freedom -actually is a return to old truths that many had forgotten or never understood.
Those developing countries in Asia relying on free market policies, for example, have enjoyed one of the most remarkable economic booms in history despite a relative lack of natural resources. The ASEAN nations and the Republic of Korea have grown at a 7 per cent a year rate over the past decade, the fastest rate in the world, and ASEAN has become a model of regional development and political co-operation. In recognition of the success of economic freedom the island nations of the South Pacific have continued to encourage the private sector as well. We are joining with them in a dedicated effort to negotiate quickly a regional fisheries agreement that will benefit all.

The success of these and other countries demonstrates that the laws of economics do not discriminate between developed and developing. For all nations equally the true source of wealth is the energy and creativity of the individual, not the State. After decades of fashionable socialist doctrine we see today on every continent efforts to decentralize, deregulate, denationalize and enlarge the scope for producers and consumers to interact in the free market. In India, China and elsewhere new policies are being adopted to unleash the creative abilities of talented peoples. At the Bonn economic summit last May the leaders of the largest industrial democracies acknowledged the same truth. The road to prosperity begins at the same starting point for all nations: freedom and incentives for the individual.
This truth should be our guide as we address today's economic challenges,.
In sub-Saharan Africa drought has placed perhaps 30 million men, women and children at risk. We do not know how many have already died. Along with other Western countries, the United States has undertaken one of the largest disaster relief programs in history. This year alone the United States has provided $1.2 billion for drought and famine relief and $800 million in other economic assistance. The nations that have been helping should continue to do so; those that have not borne their share should start to do so.
But we owe it to the suffering to ask this question: Why is food so scarce? Drought, without question, is part of the reason, but in some countries there are other, more important reasons. One is Government policies that have severely harmed agricultural productivity. These policies must be reversed. Those countries that have undertaken liberalizing reforms are reaping the benefits and can show the way for others. Another problem is lack of appropriate technologies. The United States is carrying out a long-term program to strengthen African agricultural research, which we hope will help to produce a green revolution on the continent.
 Elsewhere in the developing world, as in Africa, countries face the continuing problem of debt. Many have undertaken necessary, though painful, adjustment, taking courageous steps to cut Government spending, eliminate subsidies and price controls, permit currencies to adjust to the market, free interest rates to encourage saving and discourage capital flight and create conditions to attract new capital. Austerity, however, is certainly not an end in itself. The purpose of short-term adjustment is to get back on the track of long-term growth.
In all these efforts we must be careful that the heavy burden of servicing the historic debt levels of the developing nations of Latin America and Africa does not inhibit their future growth. Creative co-operation between borrowers and lenders, with continued constructive assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), will be essential in achieving that goal.
Other nations too have a major part to play in helping these countries overcome their debt problem and resume sustainable growth. External financing to support effective adjustment has been and will continue to be important. Access to export markets is also necessary. Indeed, an open trading system is crucial to the hopes of all of us. Trade expansion has been an engine of post-war prosperity. It would therefore be suicidal to return to the protectionism of the 1920s and 1930s which helped bring on the great depression. Protectionism is not a cure; it is a disease, a disease that could cripple all of us. Trade must be free, open and fair. The United States will work to see that it is. But there must be a level playing field. We want open trading, but that means mutuality. Barriers erected against American products are just not acceptable to us.
As President Reagan is saying today in a major speech,
'The freer the flow of world trade, the stronger the tides for human progress and peace among nations.'
 To preserve and strengthen the trading system may well be the central economic issue facing the world community today. For that reason it is essential that all nations join now in preparations for a new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (GATT) round next year; no nation, even one as large and as powerful as the United States, can by itself ensure a free trading system. All that we and others have done to provide for the free flow of goods and services and capital is based on co-operation* Indeed, it was that very spirit of co-operation that prompted the United States and four of the leading industrial nations yesterday to pledge firm resolve to work together in addressing the pressing economic issues of this decade.
Sound economic policies in every country are the key to strengthening the world economy. In the United States policies that have unleashed individual talent, reduced Government's role and stabilized prices have helped to produce more than 8 million new jobs since 1982 and lead the world out of recession. But many imbalances in the world economy remain, notably in trade accounts, exchange rates and capital flows. These must be corrected by the world community acting in concert if recent economic gains are to be preserved and hopes for progress sustained. For its part, the United States must restrain public spending, reduce its budget deficit and encourage saving. Others must do more to reduce rigidities and promote the private investment needed to facilitate adjustment and spur expansion.
I believe we can surmount our problems just as we succeeded in solving the energy crisis and bringing inflation under control. There was a time when those problems too seemed insurmountable. We can succeed again today if we have the honesty and courage to face our problems squarely and if our ways of thinking conform to reality.
Forty years ago the founders of the United Nations recognized that new ways had to be found to regulate conduct between nations. That remains true today. The
 Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights speak to us, not as different races, creeds and nationalities, but as human beings, men and women. Our task as we look at the next century is to learn that the things which unite us - the desire for peace, human rights and material well-being - as set down in those documents are far more important than the things which divide us.
The main obstacle to greater realization of the goals of the Charter is the lust of the few for power over the many, just as it has been the obstacle to human happiness since the dawn of history. But change is inevitable. And today change, technological change, holds out hope perhaps as never before. The revolution in communications and information may be the most far-reaching development of our time. Those political systems that try to stand in the way of the free flow of knowledge and information will relegate their citizens to second-class status in the next century. The future belongs to societies that can spread knowledge, adapt, innovate, tap the unfettered talents of well-informed citizens and thus fully exploit the new technologies; free societies clearly are best equipped for this challenge. The communications revolution will be a truly liberating revolution, for it threatens the monopoly of information and thought upon which tyrants rely for absolute control.
On every continent - from Nicaragua to Poland, from South Africa to Afghanistan and Cambodia - we see that the yearning for freedom is the most powerful political force all across the planet. The noble ideals of democracy and freedom are in the ascendant. Today, we can look with renewed hope to the day when the goals of the united Nations truly will be met.










I am honoured to be here 
today on behalf of the Government of Canada to once 
again reaffirm my country’s commitment to a strong 
and effective United Nations. 
(spoke in French) 
 For Canada, the United Nations remains 
indispensable for addressing the many global 
challenges that confront us today, be it the search for 
peace and security, the promotion of human rights, 
democracy and international development, combating 
terrorism or the protection of the environment. 
(spoke in English) 
 Those challenges require collective and 
cooperative strategies. They cannot be tackled by any 
one country acting alone. That is why we must 
redouble our efforts to make the United Nations more 
effective and efficient so that it can deliver real results. 
 Today, I would like to speak to the Assembly 
about Canada’s priority global engagements, and how 
they are helping to achieve the fundamental objectives 
of this Organization. 
 From the very founding of the United Nations, 
Canada has contributed ideas, action and resources to 
help to fulfil its mandate. We helped to develop the 
concept of peacekeeping. We helped it to meet the 
changing nature of security, when more robust action 
was required to end conflict, to protect civilians caught 
in the crossfire or to build peace in its aftermath. We 
have served in successive peacekeeping and 
peacemaking operations and today we are serving on 
the Peacebuilding Commission. 
 Today, Canada is contributing to peace and 
security and making sacrifices in places as diverse as 
Afghanistan, Haiti and the Sudan. Each of those 
Canadian engagements flows from a United Nations 
mandate. 
 Canada’s largest and most important overseas 
engagement is in Afghanistan, where we have more 
than 2,500 Canadians on the ground in support of the 
Security Council-mandated International Security 
Assistance Force. Canada continues to call for safe and 
unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need in 
Afghanistan. We condemn in the strongest possible 
terms the attack of 14 September against members of a 
United Nations convoy in Kandahar province who 
were carrying out a polio vaccination campaign for 
Afghan children. 
 Sadly, the Government of Afghanistan and the 
international community are all too familiar with such 
brutal and cowardly tactics. We will not be swayed 
from our efforts to improve the lives of ordinary 
Afghans. To that end, at the International Conference 
in Support of Afghanistan in Paris, Canada announced 
that it would make an additional contribution of $600 
million for Afghanistan, bringing its overall total to 
$1.9 billion over the period from 2001 to 2011. 
 Continued leadership by the United Nations is 
essential in Afghanistan. Canada stands behind the 
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We 
call on Member States to work with the United Nations 
to enhance the capacity of the Mission and to give it 
the tools required to do its job. We remain ever mindful 
 
 
17 08-53141 
 
of the challenges that Afghanistan continues to 
confront — security, access to basic services and 
impending food shortages. Collectively, we — the 
States assembled here — must deliver on the promises 
made to the Afghan people. 
(spoke in French) 
 Canada also remains committed to the promotion 
of security, governance and development in Haiti, 
efforts that are important for building a more 
democratic, prosperous and secure hemisphere. We 
consider the partnership with the United Nations in 
Haiti to be an integral part of those efforts. That is why 
we are providing the United Nations Stabilization 
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) with civilian police 
officers, military staff officers and corrections experts. 
 Canada takes a comprehensive approach to 
reconstruction and development in Haiti. We are the 
second largest bilateral donor in Haiti, with a 
$555 million commitment over five years through 2011 
in support of the country’s long-term reconstruction 
and development. MINUSTAH is in Haiti at the 
request of the Haitian Government, the most important 
partner of all in a commitment we share with Member 
States within the hemisphere and beyond. Sustained 
efforts, political stability and lasting progress on 
reforms will combine to build a better future for all 
Haitians. 
 Canada has also been a long-standing partner of 
the United Nations efforts in Africa. When the 
Secretary-General took office, he said that one of his 
top priorities would be the Sudan’s Darfur region. The 
United Nations presence in the Sudan is based on the 
very principles underlying the United Nations Charter. 
The engagement of the international community in the 
Sudan remains vital. 
(spoke in English) 
 With contributions of over $477 million since 
2006, Canada remains deeply committed to building 
sustainable peace in the Sudan and alleviating the 
suffering of those affected by the conflict. Canada’s 
support for peacekeeping operations in Sudan includes 
the deployment of personnel, a loan of armoured 
vehicles and a large voluntary financial contribution. 
Canada underscores the importance of full 
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, and calls on Sudanese authorities and the 
rebel movements to end the violence in Darfur, 
facilitate the deployment of the African Union-United 
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), 
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and 
respect human rights. 
 We are acutely aware that UNAMID is a difficult 
and often dangerous mission. In that regard, allow me 
to express the sincere condolences of the Canadian 
Government for the deaths resulting from the 
helicopter crash in the Sudan earlier today — a tragedy 
that underscores the very real threats United Nations 
personnel continue to confront in the field. 
 The current crisis in Georgia also calls for a 
unified international response. Canada supports the 
democratic and legitimate Government of Georgia and 
Georgia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. Canada 
calls on Russia to fulfil its international obligations, 
reconsider its actions and cooperate fully with the 
international community to resolve the crisis in 
Georgia in a peaceful manner. 
 Canada has consistently sought to make the 
United Nations instruments for promoting peace and 
security more effective. At the centre of those is, of 
course, the Security Council. Canada has long 
supported proposals for greater accountability and 
transparency of the Security Council to enable it better 
to shoulder the global peace and security 
responsibilities entrusted to it by the 192 Member 
States. Canada is committed to working with all 
Member States to promote a more unified and effective 
Security Council that can move past stalemate and take 
decisive action against threats to security wherever 
they may arise. 
 We therefore welcome the recent decision of the 
General Assembly to launch negotiations on Security 
Council reform at this session. It is important that we 
make progress in those negotiations. For our part, 
Canada stands ready to support reform that ensures that 
new realities are reflected in the Council while 
preserving accountability through the discipline of 
regular elections for Security Council membership. 
 Canada is proud to be the seventh largest 
contributor to the regular budget of the United Nations. 
We are also a member of a wide range of United 
Nations specialized agencies and a major contributor to 
United Nations funds and programmes. 
Humanitarianism and compassion are hallmarks of the 
Canadian identity. The United Nations is a key partner 
for the delivery of Canadian humanitarian action, with 
  
 
08-53141 18 
 
Canadian commitments this year totalling over 
$315 million. Our humanitarian assistance is aimed at 
helping the world’s most vulnerable people, including 
children, refugees and victims of conflict and natural 
disasters, and supports key United Nations programmes 
in those areas. 
 Canada is on track to meet its international 
assistance commitments, and we are ensuring that our 
aid is focused, effective and accountable. Canada will 
deliver on its promise to double international 
assistance to $5 billion by 2010-2011. 
 Canada is also serious about its commitment, 
undertaken in the Group of Eight, to double aid to 
Africa, and I am pleased to say that we are on target to 
meet that goal in 2009. Canada is also committed to 
working in partnership with other stakeholders to 
accelerate development efforts to help achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals by 2015. 
 In response to the global food crisis, Canada 
provided an extra $50 million for food aid, bringing 
our total contribution this year to $230 million — one 
of the largest in the world. Canada was also pleased to 
answer an emergency request from the World Food 
Programme (WFP) earlier this month to provide 
security for its food aid shipments to Somalia. A 
Canadian Navy frigate, HMCS Ville de Québec, is 
currently escorting WFP ships carrying life-saving 
supplies to Somalia. Canada recently extended the 
frigate’s WFP escort mission until 23 October 2008. 
 Canada is taking further concrete measures to 
enhance the effectiveness of our aid. We recently 
untied 100 per cent of our food aid to make sure it can 
be provided in the most efficient and effective way 
possible to the people who need it most. Canada is also 
fully untying all of its development assistance 
programmes by 2012-2013, in fulfilment of our 
commitment to ensuring greater effectiveness of our 
international assistance. 
 The challenges of environmental protection and 
sustainable development are rightly at the top of the 
global agenda. The most pressing challenge is that of 
climate change, and the United Nations must play a 
central role. Canada is committed to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and the need to reach consensus on a post-Bali 
framework.  
 The response to all global challenges begins at 
home. However, the sum of national actions must drive 
a collective effort at the international level. One of the 
most important components of the Bali Road Map is 
that it recognizes that no country can effectively 
address climate change on its own and that all 
countries in a position to act must do so. As such, 
Canada is fully aware of the importance of having all 
major global emitters take on meaningful and binding 
emissions reduction commitments in any future 
international agreement. 
 Canada is also acutely aware of the risks faced by 
countries most vulnerable to the impact of climate 
change, particularly small island States and the least 
developed countries. Canada is pleased to be a sponsor 
of a draft resolution on climate change and security put 
forward by the Pacific Island States. Canada has also 
supported global efforts to promote climate change 
adaptation and has contributed both expertise and 
finances to various United Nations and other 
international initiatives. 
 Sixty years ago, this body adopted the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. Canada is proud to 
recall the contribution of Canadian John Peters 
Humphrey in penning the initial draft of that landmark 
instrument. Sixty years on, we have not yet met that 
“common standard of achievement for all peoples and 
all nations” (resolution 217 (III)). We have much work 
left to do. 
 As a member of the Human Rights Council, 
Canada is working hard to make that new institution 
live up to the reform objectives that led to its creation 
two years ago. We have seen some progress and some 
setbacks in ensuring that the Council’s agenda and 
focus are balanced and objective. 
 We must continually challenge ourselves to 
improve our own records. The creation this year of the 
Universal Periodic Review, which Canada strongly 
supported as an innovative improvement to the United 
Nations human rights machinery, is an important tool 
to help States identify and address their continuing 
challenges. 
 As a community, we must stand up for the rule of 
law and for those whose rights are violated or 
undermined by the very institutions that should ensure 
their protection. That is why Canada will continue to 
take strong stands against Governments that commit 
systemic abuses against their populations. As 
 
 
19 08-53141 
 
Governments, we must remain committed to working 
together to hold each other to account on our human 
rights records and to support countries that are making 
sincere efforts to advance the human rights of their 
people. We must continue to strive for fundamental 
freedoms and human rights in order to fulfil the ideals 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
(spoke in French) 
 Canada supports an effective, soundly managed 
and results-driven United Nations. That is why it 
supports broad reform. In that regard, we call for 
extensive reform in terms of management, especially in 
the areas of oversight, accountability and human 
resource management. Those reforms are needed to 
bring the management of the United Nations in step 
with the best practices of the twenty-first century and 
to equip it with the tools needed to deliver on the 
important mandates that we as Member States ask of it. 
(spoke in English) 
 The values and ideals on which the United 
Nations was founded — the promotion of peace and 
security, of human rights and of greater prosperity for 
all through development cooperation — are also 
Canada’s and we stand ready to work within the United 
Nations to address new challenges, such as climate 
change and combating terrorism. I wish to repeat 
Canada’s willingness to work in partnership with all 
United Nations Member States towards the common 
purposes for which this Organization was created. I am pleased to be here to 
address the General Assembly. Sixty-three years ago, 
representatives from around the world gathered in San 
Francisco to complete the founding of the Charter of 
the United Nations. They met in the shadow of a 
devastating war, with grave new dangers on the 
horizon. They agreed on a historic pledge to reaffirm 
faith in fundamental human rights and unite their 
strength to maintain international peace and security. 
That noble pledge has endured trying hours in United 
Nations history, and it still guides our work today.  
 
 
9 08-51570 
 
 Yet the ideals of the Charter are now facing a 
challenge as serious as any since the United Nations 
founding: a global movement of violent extremists. By 
deliberately murdering the innocent to advance their 
aims, those extremists defy the fundamental principles 
of international order. They show contempt for all who 
respect life and value human dignity. They reject the 
words of the Bible, the Koran, the Torah or any 
standard of conscience of morality. They imperil the 
values of justice and human rights that gave birth to the 
United Nations — values that have fuelled an 
unprecedented expansion of freedom across the world.  
 To uphold the words of the Charter in the face of 
this challenge, every nation in this Hall has 
responsibilities. As sovereign States, we have an 
obligation to govern responsibly and solve problems 
before they spill across borders. We have an obligation 
to prevent our territory from being used as a sanctuary 
for terrorism, proliferation, human trafficking and 
organized crime. We have an obligation to respect the 
rights and respond to the needs of our people.  
 Multilateral organizations have responsibilities. 
For eight years, the nations in this Assembly have 
worked together to confront the extremist threat. We 
have witnessed successes and setbacks, and through it 
all a clear lesson has emerged. The United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations are needed more 
urgently than ever. To be successful, we must be 
focused, resolute and effective.  
 Instead of only adopting resolutions decrying 
terrorist acts after they occur, we must cooperate more 
closely to keep terrorist attacks from happening in the 
first place. Instead of treating all forms of Government 
as equally tolerable, we must actively challenge the 
conditions of tyranny and despair that allow terror and 
extremists to thrive. By acting together to meet the 
fundamental challenge of our time, we can lead 
towards a world that is more secure, more prosperous 
and more hopeful.  
 In the decades ahead, the United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations must continually 
confront terror. That mission requires clarity of vision. 
We must see the terrorists for what they are: ruthless 
extremists who exploit the desperate, subvert the tenets 
of a great religion and seek to impose their will on as 
many people as possible. Some suggest that those men 
would pose less of a threat if we would only leave 
them alone, yet their leaders make clear that no 
concession could ever satisfy their ambitions. Bringing 
the terrorists to justice does not create terrorism. It is 
the best way to protect our people.  
 Multilateral organizations must respond by taking 
an unequivocal moral stand against terrorism. No cause 
can justify the deliberate taking of innocent life, and 
the international community is nearing universal 
agreement on this truth. The vast majority of nations in 
this Assembly now agree that tactics like suicide 
bombing, hostage-taking and hijacking are never 
legitimate. The Security Council has adopted 
resolutions declaring terror unlawful and requiring all 
nations to crack down on terrorist financing. Earlier 
this month, the Secretary-General held a conference to 
highlight victims of terror, where he stated that 
terrorism can never be justified. 
 Other multilateral organizations have spoken 
clearly as well. The Group of 8 has declared that all 
terrorist acts are criminal and must be universally 
condemned. The Secretary-General of the Organization 
of the Islamic Conference recently spoke out against 
suicide bombing, which he said runs counter to the 
teachings of Islam.  
 The message behind those statements is 
resolutely clear. Like slavery and piracy, terrorism has 
no place in the modern world. Around the globe, 
nations are turning those words into action. Members 
of the United Nations are sharing intelligence with one 
another, conducting joint operations and freezing 
terrorists’ finances. While terrorists continue to carry 
out attacks like the terrible bombing in Islamabad last 
week, our joint actions have spared our citizens from 
many devastating blows.  
 The brutal nature of the extremists is increasingly 
clear and the coalition of nations confronting terrorists 
is growing stronger. Over the past seven years, 
Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from 
regimes that actively sponsor terror to democracies that 
fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror 
and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi 
Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. 
A few nations, regimes like Syria and Iran, continue to 
sponsor terror, yet their numbers are growing fewer 
and they are growing more isolated from the world.  
 As the twenty-first century unfolds, some may be 
tempted to assume that the threat has receded. That 
would be comforting. It would be wrong. The terrorists 
believe time is on their side, so they have made waiting 
  
 
08-51570 10 
 
out civilized nations part of their strategy. We must not 
allow them to succeed. The nations of this body must 
stand united in the fight against terror. We must 
continue working to deny the terrorists refuge 
anywhere in the world, including ungoverned spaces. 
We must remain vigilant against proliferation by fully 
implementing the terms of resolution 1540 (2004) and 
enforcing sanctions against North Korea and Iran. We 
must not relent until our people are safe from this 
threat to civilization. 
 To uphold the Charter’s promise of peace and 
security in the twenty-first century, we must also 
confront the ideology of the terrorists. At its core, the 
struggle against extremists is a battle of ideas. 
Terrorists envision a world in which religious freedom 
is denied, women are oppressed and all dissent is 
crushed. The nations represented in this Hall must 
present a more hopeful alternative — a vision where 
people can speak freely, worship as they choose and 
pursue their dreams in liberty.  
 Advancing this vision of freedom serves our 
highest ideals, as expressed in the United Nations 
Charter’s commitment to the dignity and worth of the 
human person. Advancing this vision also serves our 
security interests. History shows that when citizens 
have a voice in choosing their own leaders, they are 
less likely to search for meaning in radical ideologies, 
and when Governments respect the rights of their 
people, they are more likely to respect the rights of 
their neighbours. 
 For all these reasons, the nations of this body 
must challenge tyranny as vigorously as we challenge 
terror. Some question whether people in certain parts of 
the world actually desire freedom. This self-serving 
condescension has been disproved before our eyes. 
From the voting booths of Afghanistan, Iraq and 
Liberia to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Rose 
Revolution in Georgia, the Cedar Revolution in 
Lebanon and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, we 
have seen people consistently make the courageous 
decision to demand their liberty. 
 For all the suggestions to the contrary, the truth is 
that, whenever and wherever people are given the 
choice, they choose freedom. Nations represented in 
this Hall have supported the efforts of dissidents, 
reformers and civil society advocates in newly free 
societies through the new United Nations Democracy 
Fund, and we appreciate those efforts. As young 
democracies around the world continue to make brave 
stands for liberty, multilateral organizations like the 
United Nations must continue to stand with them. 
 In Afghanistan, a determined people are working 
to overcome decades of tyranny and protect their newly 
free society. They have strong support from all 26 
nations of the NATO alliance. I appreciate the United 
Nations decision this week to renew the mandate of the 
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
The United Nations also has an active civilian presence 
in Afghanistan, where experts are doing important 
work helping to improve education, facilitate 
humanitarian aid and protect human rights. We must 
continue to help the Afghan people defend their young 
democracy so that the Taliban does not return to power 
and Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terror. 
 In Iraq, the fight has been difficult, yet daily life 
has improved dramatically over the past 20 months 
thanks to the courage of the Iraqi people, a determined 
coalition of nations and a surge of American troops. 
The United Nations has provided the mandate for 
multinational forces in Iraq through this December, and 
the United Nations is carrying out an ambitious 
strategy to strengthen Iraq’s democracy, including 
helping Iraqis prepare for their next round of free 
elections. Whatever disagreements our nations have 
had on Iraq, we should all welcome this progress 
towards stability and peace and we should stand united 
in helping Iraq’s democracy succeed.  
 We must stand united in our support of other 
young democracies, from the people of Lebanon 
struggling to maintain their hard-won independence to 
the people of the Palestinian territories, who deserve a 
free and peaceful State of their own. We must stand 
united in our support of the people of Georgia. The 
United Nations Charter sets forth the equal rights of 
nations large and small; Russia’s invasion of Georgia 
was a violation of those rights. Young democracies 
around the world are watching to see how we respond 
to this test. The United States has worked with allies in 
such multilateral institutions as the European Union 
and NATO to uphold Georgia’s territorial integrity and 
provide humanitarian relief. Our nations will continue 
to support Georgia’s democracy. 
 In this Hall are representatives of Georgia, 
Ukraine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Liberia, Iraq and other 
brave young democracies. We admire their courage, we 
honour their sacrifices, and we thank them for their 
 
 
11 08-51570 
 
inspiring example. We will continue to stand with all 
who stand for freedom. This noble goal is worthy of 
the United Nations and it should have the support of 
every member of this Assembly.  
 Extending the reach of political freedom is 
essential to prevailing in the great struggle of our time, 
but it is not enough. Many in this Hall have answered 
the call to help their brothers and sisters in need by 
working to alleviate hopelessness. Those efforts to 
improve the human condition honour the highest ideals 
of this institution. They also advance our security 
interests. The extremists find their most fertile 
recruiting grounds in societies trapped in chaos and 
despair — places where people see no prospect of a 
better life. In the shadows of hopelessness, radicalism 
thrives. Eventually, that radicalism can boil over into 
violence, cross borders and take innocent lives across 
the world.  
 Overcoming hopelessness requires addressing its 
causes: poverty, disease and ignorance. Challenging 
these conditions is in the interest of every nation in this 
Hall, and democracies are particularly well positioned 
to carry out that work because we have experience 
responding to the needs of our own people. We are 
natural partners in helping other nations respond to the 
needs of theirs. Together, we must commit our 
resources and efforts to advancing education, health 
and prosperity.  
 Over the years, many nations have made well-
intentioned efforts to promote these goals, but the 
success of these efforts must be measured by more than 
intentions. It must be measured by results. My nation is 
placing insistence on results at the heart of our foreign 
assistance programmes. We launched a new initiative, 
called the Millennium Challenge Account, which 
directs our help to countries that demonstrate their 
ability to produce results by governing justly, fighting 
corruption and pursuing market-based economic 
policies, as well as investing in their people. Every 
country and institution that provides foreign assistance, 
including the United Nations, will be more effective by 
showing faith in the people of the developing world 
and insisting on performance in return for aid.  
 Experience also shows that, to be effective, we 
must adopt a model of partnership, not paternalism. 
This approach is based on our conviction that people in 
the developing world have the capacity to improve 
their own lives and will rise to meet high expectations 
if we set them. America sought to apply this model in 
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Every nation that 
receives American support through this initiative 
develops its own plan for fighting HIV/AIDS and 
measures the results.  
 So far, these results are inspiring. Five years ago, 
50,000 people in sub-Saharan Africa were receiving 
treatment for HIV/AIDS; today, that number is nearly 
1.7 million. We are taking a similar approach to 
fighting malaria, and so far we have supported local 
efforts to protect more than 25 million Africans. 
Multilateral organizations have made bold 
commitments of their own to fight disease. The G-8 
has pledged to match America’s efforts on malaria and 
HIV/AIDS. Through the Global Fund, many countries 
are working to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria and 
tuberculosis. Lives in the developing world depend on 
these programmes, and all who have made pledges to 
fight disease have an obligation to follow through on 
their commitments.  
 One of the most powerful engines of development 
and prosperity are trade and investment, which create 
new opportunities for entrepreneurs, help people rise 
out of poverty and reinforce such fundamental values 
as transparency and the rule of law. For all these 
reasons, many represented in this Hall have conducted 
free-trade agreements at the bilateral and regional 
levels.  
 The most effective step of all would be an 
agreement that tears down trade barriers at the global 
level. The recent impasse in the Doha round is 
disappointing, but that does not have to be the final 
word. I urge every nation to seize this opportunity to 
lift up economies around the world and reach a 
successful Doha agreement as soon as possible. 
Beyond Doha, our nations must renew our commitment 
to open economies and stand firm against economic 
isolationism. These objectives are being tested by 
turbulence in the global financial markets.  
 Our economies are more closely connected than 
ever before, and I know that many of you here are 
watching how the United States Government will 
address the problems in our financial system. In recent 
weeks we have taken bold steps to prevent a severe 
disruption of the American economy, which would 
have a devastating effect on other economies around 
the world. We promote stability in the markets by 
preventing the disorderly failure of major companies. 
  
 
08-51570 12 
 
The Federal Reserve has injected urgently needed 
liquidity into the system. Last week, I announced 
decisive action by the federal Government to address 
the root cause of much of the instability in our 
financial markets by purchasing illiquid assets that are 
weighing down balance sheets and restricting the flow 
of credit. I can assure the Assembly that my 
Administration and our Congress are working together 
to quickly pass legislation approving this strategy. And 
I am confident that we will act in the urgent time frame 
required.  
 The objectives I have laid out for multilateral 
institutions confronting terror, opposing tyranny and 
promoting effective development are difficult, but they 
are necessary tasks. To have maximum impact, 
multilateral institutions must take on challenging 
missions, and like all of us in this Hall they must work 
towards measurable goals, be accountable for their 
actions and hold true to their word.  
 In the twenty-first century, the world needs a 
competent and effective United Nations. This unique 
institution should build on its successes and improve 
its performance. Where there is inefficiency and 
corruption, that must be corrected. Where there are 
bloated bureaucracies, they must be streamlined. 
Where Members fail to uphold their obligations, there 
must be strong action — for example, there should be 
an immediate review of the Human Rights Council, 
which has routinely protected violators of human 
rights. There should be a stronger effort to help the 
people of Burma live free of the repression they have 
suffered for too long. All nations, especially members 
of the Security Council, must act decisively to ensure 
that the Government of the Sudan upholds its 
commitment to address the violence in Darfur. 
 The United Nations is an Organization of 
extraordinary potential. As it rebuilds its Headquarters, 
it must also open the door to a new age of 
transparency, accountability and seriousness of 
purpose. With determination and clear purpose, the 
United Nations can be a powerful force for good as we 
head into the twenty-first century. It can affirm the 
great promise of its founding.  
 In the final days of the San Francisco Conference, 
the delegates negotiating the United Nations Charter 
received a visit from President Harry Truman. He 
acknowledged the enormous challenges they faced and 
said that success was possible only because of what he 
called an unshakable unity of determination. Today, the 
world is engaged in another period of great challenge, 
and by continuing to work together, that unshakable 
unity of determination will be ours. Together we can 
confront and defeat the evil of terrorism. Together we 
can secure the Almighty’s gift of liberty and justice to 
millions who have not known it. Together we can build 
a world that is freer, safer and better for the 
generations who follow. ﻿I am honoured to speak with you as you open the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I should first like to congratulate the outgoing President, Guido de Marco of Malta, and salute our incoming President, Samir Al-Shihabi of Saudi Arabia.
I also want to salute especially Secretary-General Javier Peres de Cuellar, who will step down in just over three months. But let me say, Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar has served with great distinction during a period of unprecedented change and turmoil, and for almost 10 years we have enjoyed the leadership of this man of peace, a man that I, along with many Members, feel proud to call friend, and so today let us congratulate our friend and praise his spectacular service to the United Nations and to the people of the world, the Secretary-General.
Let me also welcome new Members in this Hall, two delegations representing Korea, particularly our democratic friends, the Republic of Korea, the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and new missions from the Marshall Islands and Micronesia. Twenty years ago, when I was the Permanent Representative here for the United States, there were 132 United Nations Members. Just one week ago, 159 nations enjoyed membership in the United Nations, and today the number stands at 166. The presence of these new Members alone provides reason for us to celebrate. 
My statement today will not sound like any you have heard from a President of the United States. I am not going to dwell on the super-Power competition that defined international politics for half a century. Instead, I will discuss the challenges of building peace and prosperity in a world leavened by the cold war's end and the resumption of history.
Communism held history captive for years. It suspended ancient disputes; and it suppressed ethnic rivalries, nationalist aspirations and old prejudices. As it has dissolved, suspended hatreds have sprung to life. People who for years have been denied their pasts, have begun searching for their own identities, often through peaceful and constructive means, occasionally through factionalism and bloodshed.
This revival of history ushers in a new era teeming with opportunities and perils. Let us begin by discussing the opportunities. First, history's renewal enables people to pursue their natural instincts for enterprise. Communism froze that progress until its failures became too much for even its defenders to bear, and now citizens throughout the world have chosen enterprise over envy, personal responsibility over the enticements of the State, prosperity over the poverty of central planning.
The United Nations Charter encourages this adventure by pledging to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples, and I can think of no better way to fulfil this Mission than to promote the free flow of goods and Ideas, frankly, ideas and goods will travel around the globe with or without our help. The information revolution has destroyed the weapons of enforced isolation and ignorance. In many parts of the world technology has overwhelmed tyranny, proving that the age of Information can become the age of liberation, if we limit State power wisely and free our people to make the best use of new ideas, inventions and insights. By the same token, the world has learned that free markets provide levels of prosperity, growth and happiness that centrally planned economies can never offer.
Even the most charitable estimates indicate that in recent years the free world's economies have grown at twice the rate of the former communist world. Growth does more than fill shelves; it permits every person to gain, not at the expense of others but to the benefit of others. Prosperity encourages people to live as neighbours, not as predators. Economic growth can aid international relations in exactly the same way.
Many nations represented here are parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The Uruguay Round, the latest in the post-war series of trade negotiations, offers hope to developing nations, many of which have been cruelly divided, cruelly deceived, by the false promises of totalitarianism. Here in this Hall, we hear about North-South problems. But free and open trade, including unfettered access to markets and credit, offers developing countries means of self-sufficiency and economic dignity.
If the Uruguay Round should fail, a new wave of protectionism could destroy our hopes for a better future. History shows all too clearly that protectionism can destroy wealth within countries and poison relations between them. Therefore, I call upon all members of GATT to redouble their efforts to reach a successful conclusion for the Uruguay Round. I pledge that the United States will do its part.
I cannot stress this enough: Economic progress will play a vital role In the new world. It supplies the soil in which democracy grows best. People everywhere seek government of and by the people, and they want to enjoy their inalienable rights to freedom and property and person. Challenges to democracy have failed. Just last month, coup plotters in the Soviet Union tried to derail the forces of liberty and reform, but Soviet citizens refused to follow. Most of the nations in this Hall stood with the forces of reform led by Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, and against the coup plotters.
The challenge facing the Soviet peoples now, that of building political systems based upon individual liberty, minority rights, democracy and free markets, mirrors every nation's responsibility for encouraging peaceful, democratic reform, but it also testifies to the extraordinary power of the democratic ideal. As democracy flourishes, so does the opportunity (or a third historical breakthrough, international cooperation. A year ago, the Soviet Union joined the United States and a host of other nations in defending a tiny country against aggression and opposing Saddam Hussein. For the very first time on a matter of major importance super-Power competition was replaced with international cooperation. The United Nations, in one of its finest moments, constructed a measured, principled, deliberate and courageous response to Saddam Hussein. It stood up to an outlaw who invaded Kuwait, who threatened many States within the region, who sought to set a menacing precedent for the post-cold-war world.
The coalition effort established a model for the collective settlement of disputes. Members sat the goal - the liberation of Kuwait - and devised a courageous, unified means of achieving that goal. Mow, for the first time, we have a real chance to fulfil the United Nations Charter's ambition of working 'to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom'. Those are the words of the Charter.
He will not revive these ideals if we fail to acknowledge the challenge that the renewal of history presents. In Europe and Asia, nationalist passions have flared anew, challenging borders, straining the fabric of international society. At the same time, around the world many age-old conflicts still fester. We see signs of this tumult right here. The United Nations has mounted more peace-keeping missions in the last 36 months than during its first 43 years, and although we now seem mercifully liberated from the fear of nuclear holocaust, these smaller, virulent conflicts should trouble us all.
We must face this challenge squarely - first, by pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes now in progress; secondly, and more importantly, by trying to prevent others from erupting. No one hare can promise that today's borders will remain fixed for all time, but we must strive to ensure the peaceful, negotiated settlement of border disputes.
We must also promote the cause of international harmony by addressing old feuds. We should take seriously the Charter's pledge to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours. United Nations General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), the so-called 'Zionism is racism' resolution, mocks this pledge and the principles upon which the United Nations was founded, and I call now for its repeal. Zionism is not a policy; it is the idea that led to the creation of a home for the Jewish people, to the State of Israel, and to equate Zionism with the intolerable sin of racism is to twist history and forget the terrible plight of Jews in the Second World War - and indeed throughout history. To equate Zionism with racism is to reject Israel itself, a Member in good standing of the United Nations. This body cannot claim to seek peace and at the same time challenge Israel's right to exist. By repealing this resolution unconditionally the United Nations will enhance its credibility and serve the cause of peace.
As we work to meet the challenge posed by the resumption of history, we also must defend the Charter's emphasis on inalienable human rights. Government has failed if citizens cannot speak their mind, if they cannot form political parties freely and elect governments without coercion, it they cannot practice their religion freely, if they cannot raise their families in peace, if they cannot enjoy a just return from their labour, if they cannot live fruitful lives and at the end of their days look upon their achievements and their society's, progress with pride. Politicians who talk about democracy and freedom but provide neither eventually will feel the sting of public disapproval and the power of peoples yearning to live free.
Some nations still deny their basic rights to the people, and too many voices cry out for freedom. For example, the people of Cuba suffer oppression at the hands of a dictator who has not got the word, the lone hold-out in an otherwise democratic hemisphere, a man who has not adapted to a world that has no use for totalitarian tyranny. Elsewhere, despots ignore the heartening fact that the rest of the world is embarked upon a new age of liberty.
The renewal of history also imposes an obligation to remain vigilant about new threats and old. He must expand our efforts to control nuclear proliferation. We must work to prevent the spread of chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
It is for this reason that I put forward my Middle East arms initiative, a comprehensive approach to stop and, where possible, reverse the accumulation of arms in that part of the world moat prone to violence. We must remember that self-interest will tug nations in different directions, and that struggles over perceived interests will flare sometimes into violence. We can never say with confidence where the next conflict may arise. And we cannot promise eternal peace - not while demagogue peddle false promises to people hungry with hope; not while terrorists use our citizens as pawns and drug dealers destroy our peoples. He, as a result, must band together to overwhelm affronts to basic human dignity. It is no longer acceptable to shrug and say that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter. Let us put the law above the crude and cowardly practice of hostage-holding.
In a world defined by change, we must be as firm in principle as we are flexible in our response to changing international conditions. That is especially true today of Iraq. Six months after the adoption of Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 688 (1991), Saddam continues to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and to subject the Iraqi people to brutal repression. Saddam's contempt for United Nations resolutions was first demonstrated back in August 1990, and it continues even as I am speaking. His Government refuses to permit unconditional helicopter inspections, and right now is refusing to allow United Nations inspectors to leave inspected premises with documents relating to an Iraqi nuclear weapons programme. It is the view of the United States that we must keep the United Nations sanctions in place as long as he remains in power. This also shows that we cannot compromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all of its weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. And we will not compromise.
This is not to say - let me be clear on this point - that we should punish the Iraqi people. Let me repeat: our argument has never been with the people of Iraq. It was, and is, with a brutal dictator whose arrogance dishonours the Iraqi people. Security Council resolution 706 (1991) created a responsible mechanism for sending humanitarian relief to innocent Iraqi citizens. He must put that mechanism to work. Ma must not abandon our principled stand against Saddam's aggression. This cooperative effort has liberated Kuwait. Now it can lead to a just government in Iraq. And when it does - when it does - the Iraqi people can look forward to better lives, free at home, free to engage in a world beyond their borders.
The resumption of history also permits the United Nations to resume the important business of promoting the values that I have discussed today. This body can serve as a vehicle through which willing parties can settle old disputes. In the months to come, I look forward to working with Secretary-General Peres de Cuellar and his successor as we pursue peace in such diverse and divided lands as Afghanistan, Cambodia, Cyprus, El Salvador, and Western Sahara. The United Nations can encourage free market development through its international lending and aid institutions. However, it should not dictate the particular forms of government that nations should adopt. It can, and should, encourage the values upon which the Organization was founded. Together, we should insist that nations seeking our acceptance meet standards of human decency.
Where institutions of freedom have lain dormant, the United Nations can offer them new life. These institutions play a crucial role in our quest for a new world order, an order in which no nation must surrender one iota of its own sovereignty, an order characterized by the rule of law rather than the resort to force, the cooperative development of disputes rather than anarchy and bloodshed, and an unstinting belief in human rights.
Finally, you may wonder about America's role the new world I have described. Let me assure you, the United States has no intention of striving for a pax americana. However, we will remain engaged. We will not retreat and pull back into isolationism. We will offer friendship and leadership. In short, we seek a pax universalis, built upon shared responsibilities and aspirations.
To all assembled: We have an opportunity to spare our sons and daughters the sins and errors of the past. We can build a future more satisfying than any our world has ever known. The future lies undefined before us, full of promise, littered with peril. We can choose the kind of world we want: one blistered by the fires of war and subjected to the winds of coercion and chance, or one made more peaceful by reflection and choice. Take this challenge seriously. Inspire future generations to praise and venerate you, to say, 'On the ruins of conflict, these brave men and women built an era of peace and understanding. They inaugurated a new world order, an order worth preserving for the ages.'
Good luck to each and every one of you.






﻿I know that you, Sir, will convey to the President of the General Assembly at the forty-sixth session my congratulations as I join those who have already congratulated him on his assumption of the duties of his important office. I know that he, as well as you and others, will bring wisdom and experience to bear, enabling you to build on the proud accomplishments of many distinguished predecessors.
The ranks of this Assembly have increased since lost year's general debate. The United Nations family has now been enriched by the accession of seven new members: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, North Korea, South Korea, the Marshall Island?, and Micronesia. To the representatives of these seven States I extend both a warm welcome and a pledge of Canada's continuing cooperation.
We meet this year at a time of great opportunity. The pace and direction of events of the past few months have, in general terms, augured well for a more secure and more equitable world order, and for the ultimate triumph of a world dedicated to the rule of law. But progress has presented challenges. One revolution after another has unleashed long-simmering ethnic rivalries. The changes shaking the Soviet Union have exposed the fault-lines of persistent economic and social tensions. Civil strife in Yugoslavia threatens the new peace of Europe. And growing numbers of people flee their countries of origin in the wake of political disruption, natural disasters or relentless poverty.
The international community must adapt itself and progress from a world centred on the individual nation State to an interdependent world, from a world dominated by bilateral diplomacy to one in which multilateral institutions occupy a central place.
Our adaptation at this time of revolutionary change must be both national and international. Canada is now in the process of making this kind of essential adaptation, in the face of domestic challenges. This includes a fundamental questioning of our most basic internal political structures. The Government of Canada is unshakeable in its commitment to a prosperous and united Canada, and I am confident that Canadians will succeed in renewing our own Confederation through the spirit of flexibility, tolerance, compromise and optimism that have always been a feature of Canada's relationship with this Organisation and of our many other international activities.
We owe this commitment to our own people and also to a world searching for stability, security and leadership at a time of profound and sometimes wrenching change.
Adaptation must also come to the body of doctrine and law by which States have conducted their diplomacy for centuries. In Yugoslavia, where the forces of ethnic hatred have visited death and destruction upon hundreds of people, we must not allow the principle of non-intervention to impede an effective international response. The concept of sovereignty is fundamental to statehood, to international discourse and, of course, to the United Nations itself. The current conflict in Yugoslavia is, however, more than an internal affair. A collapse of effective governmental authority in Yugoslavia, if it continues, could escalate the degree of civil strife and endanger peace and security in neighbouring countries. Thus, the concept of sovereignty must respect higher principles, including the need to preserve human life from wanton destruction.
That is why Canada has asked the security Council to consider the situation in Yugoslavia. On matters of peace and security, the Council speaks for all of us. Its actions carry the weight and authority of the entire world community. We believe that it can and should add that weight and authority to the efforts of the European Community and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to bring about a peaceful, negotiated settlement.
Should it be decided that a United Nations peace-keeping operation would contribute to such a solution, I want to assure you that Canada is ready and willing to do its part, as we have done numerous times in the past when duty and obligation to the promotion of peace, security and stability are clear.
Events within the Organisation over the past year have been ground-breaking. Ordinary Canadians have been active players in these events, and we have participated with commitment and energy as the United Nations has lived up to its Charter mandate. Canadians supported United Nations action in the Persian Gulf. They supported our country's participation in the efforts to restore Kuwaiti sovereignty because they recognised that fundamental international principles were at stake. But they would not have supported these actions without the clear authority of the United Nations Security Council.
Now, those same Canadians want us to build an even more effective United Nations, one that is able to work for comprehensive security everywhere, based on the international rule of law. The need to build such an overriding security framework is a central lesson of the events of the past year.
I believe that we must look beyond a system that only inhibits armed confrontations. I believe that we need a new definition of the concept of multilateral security, a definition that takes into account the new and varied threats to global peace and security. These include the depletion of the ozone layer, the degradation of our seas, the debilitating scourge of illicit drugs, world-wide epidemics such as AIDS, mass exoduses of people from one country to another and the desperate poverty that persists in many parts of the world. We also recognize that our collective security depends upon democracy and respect for human rights.
The Gulf Crisis showed that the United Nations has the will and the capacity to repel military aggression. But can we meet these many new challenges? Challenges to economic and social development, to human rights and freedoms and to the environment?
For Canada, the single most important priority is to make the United Nations stronger, more effective and more relevant to the challenges of this decade. He can begin by taking a fresh look at both the United Nations Charter and the Security Council.
Pew people, for example, realise that seven countries that have joined the United Nations and are serving it with distinction are still identified as 'enemy states'. He can and should find ways to remove this archaic stigma.
As for the Security Council itself, we, like others, are looking for effective leadership from the current five members, which today are working together in the kind of partnership envisaged in the Charter. Canada believes it is not too soon to start looking ahead to the day when key countries, representing all regions of the globe, are permanent members of the Security Council. In the meantime, our immediate priority is to ensure that the Security Council, in its present form, can function with vision, effectiveness and wisdom.
As a starting-point, we must strengthen the Council's capacity to take preventive or anticipatory actions. An ability to assess impending flash-points, engage the necessary political will at. the earliest possible stage and take effective, decisive and timely action will increase the lead-time in reacting to events and reduce security risks by minimising the element of surprise. Indeed, the very capacity of the United Nations system to provide early and effective warning may itself discourage recourse to conflict.
I believe we can accomplish this within the existing Charter as long as the Secretary-General can continue to play a strong leadership role. We can be proud - as can Javier Perez de Cuellar himself - that during his tenure there have been a number of remarkable accomplishments despite enormous constraints. In recognizing his achievements, we acknowledge that his office needs stronger support from us to ensure that his successor can continue to provide the same inspired leadership.
At another and very practical level, for the United Nations to be efficient, all Member States must respect their financial obligations. This means paying on time and in full. Given its enhanced role, it is unacceptable in the extreme that the United Nations should be paralysed by a lack of sufficient resources because assessments go unpaid.
Canada is committed to improving the United Nations ability to channel the military resources of Member States to peaceful purposes. This is essential both for humanitarian purposes and for promoting peace and security through peace-keeping, and through military enforcement when necessary. We look to increasing the capability of the Secretary-General to plan and conduct peace-keeping missions. We should also explore ways of turning these military resources to humanitarian relief purposes.
We also need to look more closely at regional security. We are very much aware, all of us, that the Security Council's ability to deter aggressive action cannot by itself provide global security. In addition, we need effective regional security arrangements on a cooperative basis, arrangements that can address some of the underlying causes of insecurity and instability.
The new global climate for cooperation has created opportunities for regions to address their own problems without being used as dominoes in some wider ideological game. It has also created obligations for regions to do so. This approach is crucial for long-lasting peace and security in regions such as Central and Eastern Europe and the Asia-Pacific. It has been essential for the progress towards peace in Cambodia and the solution of other regional conflicts. In the Middle East, problems remain, but we believe that solutions to these difficult problems are now a little closer. Canada will continue to support such constructive initiatives as the current efforts of the United States based on the principles enshrined in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We call for direct negotiation between the parties concerned as the only route to a just and lasting peace. We continue to hope that a peace conference can open the door to those negotiations.
In the meantime, all countries can make particular efforts in the coming session to demonstrate our sensitivity to the parties directly involved. Within our own purview, a decision by this session of the General Assembly to rescind the infamous 'Zionism is racism' resolution would send a powerful and positive signal, and Canada would support a move to do so.
Renewed efforts to design a comprehensive and effective framework for dealing with the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are also absolutely essential. The Gulf conflict showed that conventional arms, as well as weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, can destabilize entire regions. Since 1950, shortly after the Organization was founded, the world has suffered 125 wars. Those wars have killed 25 million people, almost all as a result of conventional, ordinary weapons. How many more conflicts, how many more deaths, how many more destitute refugees does the international community need before we apply the necessary political commitment we all must show to eliminate these threats?
Canada was among the first nations to call for definitive action. In February our Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, characterized as insane the build-up of weapons that had taken place in Iraq, and we are still seeing that insanity today. At that time, the Prime Minister launched an initiative that called for a number of concrete steps: first, universal adherence to the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty and its indefinite extension beyond 1995; secondly, immediate conclusion of a global, comprehensive and verifiable convention banning the acquisition, possession and use of chemical weapons; thirdly, strengthening of the biological and toxin weapons convention; and, fourthly, transparency of international arms sales, particularly by the establishment of a United Nations register.
He are, with others, moving ahead with proposals to address the areas of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. With respect to conventional weapons, transparency is vital, not only for knowing what is going on in the arms trade but also for building confidence and trust. A global arms-transfer register that is universal, non-discriminatory and effective is long overdue. That register should also include existing national inventories, and we must be prepared to act on the basis of that information.
We applaud the historic advances made over the past year in East-West arms control. We urge all parties to ratify and implement the Treaty on conventional forces in Europe and the START Treaty as soon as possible and then to begin anew to reduce unnecessarily large arsenals further.
Let me point out that in calling for this we are not naive. Every country has a legitimate right to assess its own defence needs and every country has the right to act accordingly. But no country, under guise of defence, has the right to accumulate arms that are intended to destroy its neighbours. Equally troubling are excessive expenditures on arms that sacrifice such other important priorities as health, education and agriculture. The choice is there for all of us to make. The old saying is 'They shall beat their swords into ploughshares' - instruments of destruction or tools for peace.
I should also like to say a few words about the effectiveness of humanitarian relief. Assistance to victims of natural, economic and political disasters has always been a priority of the United Nations. Yet we are well aware that the United Nations response to these crises has lost Its edge, dulled by quarrels among agencies and jealous hoarding of admittedly scant resources. In the face of the human tragedy involved, these practices are inexcusable and intolerable. Hence, it is time for the appointment of a senior official for humanitarian relief and disaster assistance who can organise prompt international responses to disaster with dispatch and compassion.
Re-invigorating the effectiveness of the United Nations Disaster Relief Organisation and cheating stronger links between New York and Geneva can provide inter-agency responses that are needed, coherent and focused responses. We support the establishment of a new United Nations fund to provide flexibility for humanitarian relief at the onset of a disaster.
With respect to developing countries, despite the fiscal constraints that are affecting virtually all countries in the world, Canada believes that a strengthened and more effective United Nations must continue its focus on helping the poorest among us.
Developing countries are making major efforts to reform their political and economic systems. Unhappily, in many countries, especially those in Africa, as dramatically confirmed in the Secretary General's report on the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, debt-service obligations continue to exceed by far the rapacity to pay. That challenge has been severely compounded by drought, desertification, environmental degradation and disease, and by the migration of desperate people fleeing these perils.
What are the answers? While they may be complex, they are not new. The common goal of sustainable development depends upon participatory democracy, upon open, market-based economic policies, upon sound economic management and upon an orderly international trading system, which we are trying to ensure in the Uruguay Round of the multilateral trade negotiations. With ideological blocs now dissolving, we must not invent new economic blocs to divide us once again.
Over the past year we have seen remarkable progress in the area of human rights - one of Canada's favourite topics. For example, South Africa has taken important steps towards dismantling apartheid and constructing a non-racial democracy. Much, however, as we all know, remains to be done. The 1993 World Conference should become a focal point for enhancing international efforts to promote a universal culture of human rights. As we approach that Conference, we must ask how the United Nations Centre for Human Rights in Geneva can become a more vigorous and more vocal watch-dog for human rights. Given the priority we attach to human rights as one of the three primary objectives of the Charter, we must build the institutional capabilities of the United Nations system so that it can perform its functions effectively. The discrepancy between our goals in the human rights field and the modest means at the disposal of the Secretary-General is becoming increasingly anomalous.
Events of recent months have also focused increased and deserved attention on democratic institutions. We all applaud those countries that have held free and fair elections in the past year - many for the first time. But democracy is more than an electoral process; it is a way of thinking, and it must become a part of our being. It requires institutional support, including a free press and the vigilant protection of an independent judiciary. At this session of the General Assembly, we intend to pursue a resolution on the independence of the judiciary.
The United Nations must also intensify its work to achieve equality for women. Although the United Nations has taken some important steps to promote gender equality since the proclamation of the International Women's Year and the United Nations Decade for Women, the majority of the world's women still lag far behind men in power, wealth and opportunity, and they still do much of the work.
By its own actions and in its own operations, the leadership of the Organization must provide leadership on all issues of women's equality. A long overdue step would be to ensure the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat by appointing more women to senior positions.
Greater energy and vigour must be brought to bear in the implementation of forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women, including programmes designed to advance literacy. Efforts to '5 that women participate fully and have a voice in the development, process must be pursued and pushed hard. Beyond considerations of social justice and equity, which is at the foundation of our belief in this issue, it is time that we realized that no nation can be fully developed until all of its citizens are given not only the opportunity but also the ability to contribute their talents, their intelligence and their energy to that goal.
A key human rights challenge as well is to improve the lives of the world's children. This includes not only full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child but also the ambitious goals of the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at the World Summit for Children and submitted at last year's session of the General Assembly by Prime Minister Mulroney.
I want to express Canada's pleasure at the follow-up that is taking place under the aegis of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). As for our own follow-up, we have taken several initiatives in order to increase awareness about children's issues and to encourage cooperation across Canada.
Let me talk a little bit also about the environment. In just eight months world leaders will gather in Rio de Janeiro for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). What a great opportunity to launch a concerted shift to more sustainable forms of development, to integrate environmental concerns into economic development. It is an opportunity to infuse our efforts to protect the international environment with the political will required to do so. It is an opportunity to forge an international consensus that will prevent fracturing our efforts into an unbridgeable divide between developed and underdeveloped countries.
The Rio conference is not an optional occasion. It is approaching, and we should recognize now, well in advance of our deliberations, that the price of failure will be high indeed.
From our perspective, a good package at Rio would consist of four elements: the Earth Charter, dealing with principles; Agenda 21, setting out actions; Conventions on Climate Change and Biodiversity; and a Statement of Principles on Forests. For this package to succeed, we will have to ensure that political commitments are made for the necessary resources, the transfer of technology and the adaptation of institutions.
But we are worried. Now that three of the four preparatory meetings have been held, the results can be assessed. I fear that we have not overcome the two great risks that UNCED faces: disinterest on the part of the Governments of many developed countries and a slide towards two solitudes of rich and poor.
It is true that we in Canada are worried about climate change. He are worried about the loss of species, about pollutants in the Arctic food chain, ocean resources and forests. But we, as a developed country, recognise that for developing countries eliminating poverty, ensuring nutrition and eradicating disease are top priorities and are inextricably linked to the environment. So we recognise that we cannot find solutions to one set of problems without acting on the other.
Environment and development must become a joint preoccupation. He know that developing countries need assistance to implement sustainable development. UNCED, if it does nothing else, must address that issue head on. It must come to grips with the key cross-sectoral issues, namely, human settlements, poverty and sustainability, financial resources, technology transfer, and the international economic environment, including questions of terms of trade and debt.
An important distinction between UNCED and other major conferences - and it is a positive one - is the vital role played by the many sectors outside of government which will be participating. Youth, women, indigenous people, business, industry, labour, the world's cities, both environmental and developmental non-governmental organizations, universities, colleges, scientific associations with competence and relevance have been actively participating in the UNCED process. These sectors will be present at UNCED to undertake parallel activities focusing on their contributions to the implementation of sustainable development. They will be writing their own chapters on Agenda 21. And the Conference should be structured to facilitate their special and important contributions.
There are simply no viable alternatives to practical, future-oriented results at this Conference. As we begin the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly, we must constantly remind ourselves that we are not here to represent blocs, nor to promote ideologies. We are here to represent people. 'He the peoples of the United Nations' are the words taken from the Charter. Never have these words meant more or held more promise than today. But words cannot turn famine into bounty, discrimination into equality, repression into freedom, or brutality into compassion. They will mean little if we fail to give ourselves the tools for effective action or if we succumb to the temptation of unilateralism.
Canada is determined not only to honour those words but also to ensure that the Organisation, which we have long supported in the ideals that it represents, has the means to put them into practice. Canadians want to live on a planet that is peaceful, prosperous and just. We have it here in the Assembly in our power to build such a world. We build it nation by nation, individual by individual, and collectively here together.
We are encouraged by recent events and the role that the United Nations has played in those events.
Let us, as the United Nations, move from strength to strength for all the peoples of the world.
A short walk from this Hall is the delegates' Meditation Room, a refuge from a world deafened by the noise of strife and violence. 'We want to bring back the idea of worship', Dag Haramarskjold once said about this room, 'devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves'.
It is just such devotion that gave birth to the United Nations: devotion to the dream of world peace and freedom, of human rights and democratic self-determination, of a time when, in those ancient words, '... they shall beat their swords into plowshares ... nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more'.
The United States remains committed to the United Nations. For over 40 years, this Organization has provided an international forum for harmonizing conflicting national interests and has made a significant contribution in such fields as peace-keeping, humanitarian assistance, and eradicating disease. Yet, no one knows better than those in this Hall how the noble ideals embodied in the Charter have often remained unfulfilled. This Organization itself faces a critical hour - that
is usually stated as a fiscal crisis. But we can turn this 'crisis' into an opportunity. The important reforms proposed by the Group of Experts can be a first step towards restoring this Organization's status and effectiveness. The issue, ultimately, is not one of cash but of credibility. If all the Members of this universal Organization decide to seize the moment and turn the rhetoric of reform into reality, the future of the United Nations will be secure. And members have my word for it: My country, which has always given the United Nations generous support, will continue to play a leading role in the effort to achieve its noble purposes.
When I came before the Assembly last year, an important moment in the pursuit of those purposes had not yet occurred. The leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States were to meet in Geneva. These discussions have now been held. For over 15 hours, the Soviet and American delegations met. For about five hours, General Secretary Gorbachev and I talked alone.
Our talks were frank. The talks were also productive - in a larger sense than even the documents that were agreed. Mr. Gorbachev was blunt; so was I. We came to realize again the truth of the statement: Nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. And I did not hesitate to tell Mr. Gorbachev our view of the source of that mistrust: the Soviet Union's record of seeking to impose its ideology and rule on others. So we acknowledged the deep and abiding differences between our systems of government, our views of history, and the future of mankind. But, despite these differences, we resolved to work together for real reductions in nuclear arms, as well as progress in other areas.
Delegates to the forty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, today I want to report to you on what has transpired since the summit, notably the important letter X sent on 25 July to Mr. Gorbachev. In that letter, I dealt with the important issues of reducing nuclear arms, agreeing on strategic defenses, and limiting nuclear testing. In addition to those issues, which concern the military aspects of Soviet-American relations, I would also like to address other essential steps towards peace: the resolution of political conflicts, the strengthening of the international economy, and the protection of human rights.
Before I do this, however, let me, in the tradition of candor established at Geneva, tell you that a pall has been cast over our relations with the Soviet Union. I refer here to a particularly disturbing example of Soviet transgressions against human rights.
Recently - after the arrest of a Soviet national and united Nations employee accused of espionage in the United States - an American correspondent in Moscow was made the subject of fabricated accusations and trumped-up charges. He was arrested and jailed in a callous disregard of due process and numerous human rights conventions. In effect, he was taken as a hostage - even threatened with the death penalty.
Both individuals have now been remanded to their respective ambassadors. But this is only an interim step, agreed to by the United States for humanitarian reasons, it does not change the facts of the case: Gennadi Zakharov is an accused spy who should stand trial; Nicholas Daniloff is an innocent hostage who should be released. The Soviet Union bears the responsibility for the consequences of its action. Misusing the United Nations for the purposes of espionage does a grave disservice to this Organization.
The world expects better. It expects contributions to the cause of peace that only the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union can make.
It is for this reason that I wrote last summer to Mr. Gorbachev with new arms control proposals. Before discussing the proposals, let us be clear about which weapons are the most dangerous and threatening to peace. The threat does not come from defensive systems, which are a shield against attack, but from offensive weapons - ballistic missiles that hurtle through space and can wreak mass destruction on the surface of the Earth - especially the Soviet Union's heavy, accurate ICBMs, with multiple warheads, which have no counterparts in size or number in any other country.
That is why the United States has long urged radical, equitable, verifiable reductions in these offensive systems. Note that I said reduction; for this is the real purpose of arms control: not just to codify the levels of today's arsenals, not just to channel their further expansion, but to reduce them in ways that will reduce the danger of war. Indeed, the United States believes the prospect of a future without such weapons cf mass destruction must be the ultimate goal of arms control.
I am pleased to say that the Soviet Union has now embraced our idea of radical reductions in offensive systems. At the Geneva summit last November, we agreed to intensify work in this area. Since then, the Soviets have made detailed proposals which, while not acceptable to us, appear to represent a serious effort. So we continue to seek a 50 per cent reduction of American and Soviet arsenals - with the central focus on the reduction of ballistic missile warheads. If the Soviet Union wants only a lesser reduction, however, we are prepared to consider it but as an interim measure. In other provisions as well, we have sought to take account of Soviet concerns. So there has been movement.
Similarly, in the area of intermediate-range nuclear forces, the United States seeks the total elimination of such missiles on a global basis. Again, if the Soviet Union insists on pursuing such a goal in stages, we are prepared to conclude an interim agreement without delay.
All this gives me hope. I can tell representatives that the exchanges between our two sides this summer could well have marked the beginning of serious, productive negotiation on arms reductions. The ice of the negotiating stalemate could break, if both sides intensify their effort in the new round of Geneva talks and if we keep the promises we made to each other last November.
For too long a time, however, the Soviet response has been to downplay the need for offensive reductions. When the United States began work technology to make offensive nuclear weapons obsolete some day, the Soviets tried to make that the main issue - as if the main danger to strategic stability was a defense against missiles that is still on the drawing boards, rather than the menacing ballistic missiles themselves that already exist in excessive numbers.
Still, the United States recognizes that both the offensive and defensive sides of the strategic equation must be addressed. And we have gone far to meet Soviet concerns expressed about the potential offensive use of strategic defensive systems. I have offered firm and concrete assurances that our strategic defense initiative could never be used to deploy weapons in space that can cause mass destruction on earth. I have pointed out that the radical reduction we seek now in offensive arsenals would be additional insurance that strategic defense initiative cannot be used to support a first-strike strategy. Our preference from the beginning has been to move forward co-operatively with the Soviets on strategic defenses, so that neither side will feel threatened and both can benefit from the strategic revolution that strategic defense initiative represents.
The United States continues to respect the anti-ballistic missile Treaty - in spite of clear evidence that the Soviets are violating it. We have told the Soviets that, if we can both agree on radical reductions in strategic offensive weapons, we are prepared right now to sign ah agreement with them on research, development, testing and deployment of strategic defenses based on the following.
First, both sides would agree to confine themselves, through 1991, to research, development and testing, which are permitted by the anti-ballistic missile Treaty, to determine whether advanced systems of strategic defense are technically feasible.
Secondly, a new treaty, signed now, would provide that, if after 1991 either side should decide to deploy such a system, that side would be obliged to offer a plan for sharing the benefits of strategic defense and eliminating offensive ballistic missiles. This plan would be negotiated over a two-year period.
Thirdly, if the two sides cannot agree after two years of negotiation, either side would be free to deploy an advanced strategic defensive system, after giving six months* notice to the other.
As the United States has repeatedly made clear, we are moving towards a future of greater reliance upon strategic defense. The United States remains prepared to talk about how - under what ground rules and process - we and the Soviet Union can do this co-operatively. Such strategic defenses, coupled with radical reductions in offensive forces, would represent a safer balance and give future statesmen the opportunity to move beyond it - to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
In addition to our proposals on offensive reductions and strategic defense, we have suggested new steps in another area - nuclear testing. Just as eliminating all nuclear weapons is our long-term goal, so too is a total ban on nuclear
testing; but both must be approached with practical steps. For the reality is that for now we still must rely on these weapons for the deterrence of war; thus the safety and reliability of our deterrent are themselves critical to peace.
The United States is proud of its record of nuclear safety and intends to maintain it. Nevertheless, we are as I said, ready now to take two important steps towards limiting nuclear testing: first, we ace ready to move forward on ratification of the Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions, once agreement is reached on improved verification procedures. We have proposed new ideas to make this possible; secondly, upon ratification of those treaties - and in association with a program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons - we are prepared to discuss ways to implement a step-by-step parallel program of limiting and ultimately ending nuclear testing.
Those are steps that we could take in the near future to show the world that we are moving forward. I therefore call upon the Soviet Union to join us in practical, attainable progress in limiting nuclear testing.
Just a few days ago I received a reply from General Secretary Gorbachev to my letter of 25 July - and, for the moment, let me say simply that we are giving it
As we move towards our goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, it is vital that we also address important imbalances in other kinds of weapons. This is why the United States has proposed a comprehensive global ban on all chemical weapons and why we and our allies have tried hard to break the stalemate in the conventional force negotiations in Vienna. In the Stockholm Conference a major advance has been achieved: a concrete new set of military confidence-building measures which
But we must remember from the experience of the 1970s that progress in arms control cannot be divorced from regional political developments. As I said at the beginning, political tensions cause military competition, not the other way around.
However, while the United States and the Soviet Union disagree over the root causes of political tension, we agree that regional conflicts could escalate into global confrontation. Last year, from this rostrum, I presented a formula for peace which would apply to five critical regional conflicts that are potential flash points for wider conflicts. I pointed out how difficult it is for the United States to accept Soviet assurances of peaceful intent when 126,000 Soviet troops prosecute a vicious war against the Afghan people; when 140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers wage war on the people of Cambodia; when 1,700 Soviet advisers and 2,500 Cuban combat troops are involved in military planning and operations in Ethiopia; when 1,300 Soviet military advisers and 36,000 Cuban troops direct and participate in combat operations to prop up an unpopular, repressive regime in Angola; when hundreds of millions of dollars in Soviet arms and Soviet-bloc advisers help a dictatorial regime in Nicaragua try to subvert and betray a popular revolution.
The danger inherent in these conflicts must be recognized. Marxist-Leninist regimes tend to wage war as readily against their neighbors as they routinely do against their own people. In fact, the internal and external wars often become indistinguishable. In Afghanistan, for example, the puppet regime has announced its intention to relocate tens of thousands of people from border areas, Can anyone doubt this will be done in classic communist style - by force? Many will die, to make it easier for the Soviets and their satellite troops to intimidate Pakistan.
It is just such transgressions that make the risk o£ confrontation with democratic nations so acute. So, once again, I propose a three-point peace process for the resolution of regional conflicts: first, talks between the warring parties themselves, without which an end to violence and national reconciliation are impossible; secondly, discussions between the united States and the Soviet Union - not to impose solutions but to support peace talks and eventually eliminate the supply of arms ^and the proxy troops from abroad; thirdly, if the talks are successful, joint efforts to welcome each country back into the world economy and the community of nations that respect human rights.
In addition to regional disputes, the grave threat of terrorism also jeopardizes the hopes for peace. No cause, no grievance can justify it. Terrorism is heinous and intolerable. It is the crime of cowards - cowards who prey on the innocent, the defenseless, and the helpless.
With its allies and other nations, the United States has taken steps to counter terrorism directly - particularly State-sponsored terrorism. Last April, the United States demonstrated that it will defend its interests and act against terrorist aggression. Let me assure all of you today, especially let me assure any potential sponsors of terrorism, that the American people are of one mind on this issue. Like other civilized peoples of the world, we have reached our limit. Attacks against our citizens or our interests will not go unanswered.
We will also do all in our power to help other law-abiding nations threatened by terrorist attacks. To that end, the United States believes that the understandings reached by the seven industrial democracies at the Tokyo summit last May made a good start towards international accord in the war on terrorism. We recommend to the General Assembly consideration of the Tokyo resolutions.
Moving to the economic realm, how ironic it is that some continue to espouse such ideus as a 'new international economic order' based on State control when the world is learning, as never before, that the freedom of the individual, not the power of the State, is the key to economic dynamism and growth. Nations have turned away from centralized management and government controls and towards the incentives and rewards of the free market. They have invited their citizens'to develop their talents and abilities to the fullest and, in the process, to provide jobs, to create wealth, to build social stability and foster faith in the future for all. The economic summits of the industrial democracies have paid a tribute to these principles - as has the historic United Nations special session on Africa in
Hay. We applaud the African nations' call for reform leading to greater reliance on their private sectors for economic growth. We believe that overcoming hunger and economic stagnation requires policies that encourage Africa's own productivity and initiative; such a policy framework will make it easier for the rest of the world, including the United States, to help. The laws of economic incentives do not discriminate between developed and developing countries. They apply to all equally.
Much of the recent recovery in the world economy can be directly attributed to this growth of economic freedom. And it is this trend that offers such hope for the future. And yet this new hope faces a grave threat: the menace of trade barriers. History shows that the imposition of such barriers invites retaliation, which in turn sparks the very sort of trade wars that plunged the world in the 1930s deeper into depression and economic misery. Truly, protectionism is destructionism.
That is why the United States seeks the assistance of all countries represented here in the General Assembly in protecting the practice of free and fair trade. We applaud the success of the meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) trade ministers last week in Uruguay, where agreement was reached to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations covering a wide range of topics important to economic growth, with over 90 other countries members of GATT, the United States is working to maintain the free flow of international trade.
In addition to resistance to protectionism, the United States is also seeking to stimulate world economic growth in other ways. Our Treasury bill interest rate is now just over 5 per cent, the lowest it has been in nine years - which provides enormous relief to debtor countries. America's new tax structure will open the way for greater prosperity at home, which will contribute to greater prosperity abroad.
Finally, the united States is working with other countries to minimize currency swings, to promote stability in the monetary markets, to establish predictability as a basis for prosperity.
But, the United States believes the greatest contribution we can make to world prosperity is the continued advocacy of the magic of the market-place - the truth, the simple and proven truth, that economic development is an outgrowth of economic freedom just as economic freedom is the inseparable twin of political freedom and democratic government.
And it is here that we come to our final category - human rights - the indispensable element for peace, freedom, and prosperity. I note that Mr. Gorbachev has used in recent speeches the same categories I have used here todays the military, the political, and the economic; except that he titled his fourth category: humanitarian.
The difference is revealing. The United States believes that respect for the individual, for the dignity of the human person - those rights outlined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Hunt i Rights - does not belong in the realm of charity or 'humanitarian' causes. Respect for human rights is not social work; it is not merely an act of compassion, it is the first obligation of government and the source of its legitimacy.
It also is the foundation-stone in any structure of world peace. All through history, it has been the dictatorships and the tyrannies that have surrendered first to the cult of militarism and the pursuit of war. Countries based on the consent of the governed, countries that recognize the inalienable rights of the individual, do not make war on each other. Peace is more than just an absence of war. True peace is justice, true peace is freedom. And true peace dictates the recognition of human rights.
Commitments were made more than 10 years ago in Helsinki concerning those rights and their recognition. We need only look to the East today to see how sadly unfulfilled those commitments are. The persecution of scientists, religious leaders, peace activists, political dissenters, and other prisoners of conscience continues unabated behind the Iron Curtain. You know, one section of the Helsinki Accords even speaks to: 'improvement of working conditions of journalists'.
So, it is clear that progress in the human rights area must keep pace with progress in other areas. A failure on this score will hinder further movement in East-West relations.
These, then, are the areas of concern and of opportunity that the United States sees in the quest for peace and freedom - the twin objectives of the United Nations Charter.
Last year, I pointed out in my address to the General Assembly the differences between the United States and the Soviet Union are deep and abiding. But I also called for a fresh start in relations between our two nations, a fresh start that could benefit our own people and the people of every nation. Since that time, the United States has taken action and put forth new proposals that could lead our two countries and the entire world in a direction we all have long sought to go. Now more than ever, it is the responsibility of the Soviet Union to take action and demonstrate that they too are continuing the dialog for peace.
As I have said, I believe that we can be hopeful about the world and the prospects for freedom. We only need look around us to see the new technologies that may some day spare future generations the nightmare of nuclear terror, or the growing ranks of democratic activists and freedom fighters, or the increasing movement towards free market economies, or the extent of world-wide concern about the rights of the individual in the face of brute, State power.
In the past, when I have noted such trends - when I have called for a 'forward strategy for freedom' and predicted the ultimate triumph of democratic rule over totalitarianism - some have accused me of telling people what they want to hear, of urging them not: to engage the day but to escape it.
Yet, to hope is to believe in humanity; and in its future. Hope remains the highest reality, the age-old power; hope is at the root of all the great ideas and causes that have bettered the lot of humankind across the centuries.
History teaches us to hope - for it teaches us about man, and about the irrepressible human spirit, A Nobel laureate in literature, a great figure of the American South, William Faulkner, once said that the last sound heard on earth would be that of the two remaining humans arguing over where to go in the spaceship they had built. In his speech to the Nobel Committee in 1950, Faulkner spoke of the nuclear age, of the general and universal physical fear it had engendered, a fear of destruction that had become almost unbearable. But, he said:
'I decline to accept the end of a man. I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail. He is immortal ... because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance.'
Faulkner spoke of the old verities and truths of the heart, of the courage, honor, pride, compassion, pity, sacrifice and, yes, that hope which is the glory of our past. And all of these things we find today in our present; we must use them to build our future. It is why today we can lift up our spirits and our hearts; it is why we resolve that with God's help the cause of humanity will not merely endure but prevail; that some day all the world - every nation, every people, every person - will know the blessings of peace and see the light of freedom.

May I first congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of this session and pledge Canada's full support.
I should also like to wish the Secretary-General well after his recent surgery. His dedication and courage have been an inspiration to us all, and we are thankful that we can continue to rely on his leadership.
In ray first speech to the General Assembly, two years ago, I described Canada as a 'friend' of the United Nations. In fact, we are more than that. We believe this institution is essential to the safety of the world, and we defend it even when its actions are foolish or infuriating or wrong. Our country is thirtieth in population size in the world, but fourth in the size of our financial contribution to the United Nations system. Canada's commitment will not alter or change. But the commitment of Canada - and of other countries like us - will not alone protect the United Nations from the erosion of respect which is slowly weakening the Organization we built to bring the world together.
When we gathered last year to celebrate the fortieth anniversary, a sad irony faced us: the United Nations was becoming more necessary and less effective.
Who among us cannot list many issues that should be addressed and resolved here, but are not? Who among us has not thought of referring one or another issue to this forum, but then held back for fear that debate would serve only to exacerbate our differences? Our instincts tell us that this is the right place for issues of global importance, but we often fail to raise them. That failure is the expression of our fear. It has led us more and more to resort to blocs, to bilateralism and even to unilateralism, (spoke in French)
During the General Assembly session last spring, it became obvious that there were some of us who were not yet convinced of the need for reform. For my part, I was unable to note either any marked reduction in rhetoric or any great progress towards pragmatism and the search for consensus. The only exceptions - and they should not have been exceptions but the rule - were the decisions taken by consensus on the struggle against terrorism and on the improvement of the situation in Africa. But even here that was only a beginning.
I would be very pleased if I could state that we here had already renewed our
commitment to the fundamental purposes of the Charter and had revitalized the Organization. Of course, such a result could not have been expected in the space of a year. Nevertheless, the period has been sufficiently long for progress to have been made. On the contrary, the threat of financial failure looming over the Organization has become even greater,- and new doubts are being expressed regarding its relevance, (continued in English)
We need reform on two fronts - financial and political. This session starts its deliberations with the consideration of the Report of the Group of High-Level Experts on the Administration and Finances of the United Nations. The 18 experts deserve our profound gratitude. There are some recommendations with which Canada might quibble. But this is not a time for quibbling. The recommendations should be accepted without change and applied as soon as possible. They would reinforce the significant measures of financial reform already undertaken by the Secretary-General. They key area that requires further discussion - the planning and budgetary process - is profoundly contentious. We are obviously divided. But we must find common ground lest the whole reform process be imperiled. Our acceptance or rejection of the report of the Group of 18 will be the litmus test of our commitment to renew the capacity of the United Nations to fulfill its mandate.
Our budgets here are swollen by the accumulation of outdated and misguided programs. A thorough review would free resources for meeting needs that have long been relatively neglected. These include large areas of development, in particular the promotion of women and the promotion of human rights in general.
We must also deal with the question of arrears and withholdings. At present, these amount to a total of $400 million. This shortfall has severely strapped the Organization. A fixed schedule of repayment, allowing for some flexibility, would provide a solution to the arrears problem. But even more important is the question
of withholdings, which, as the Assembly knows, threatens to cripple the Organization financially this year. We look to those States which are withholding to follow the example of the People's Republic of China, which, without any change in 'consistent principled positions', has announced payment of accumulated withholdings of $4.4 million.
The adoption of the report of the Group of 18 and the settlement of arrears and withholdings would address half the problem. The other half is more basic. There simply is no escaping the fact that world-wide support for this institution depends on its performance. There may be some who think that if the United Nations were flush with funds all would be well. But the stark reality is that the United Nations must be reformed politically as well as financially.
We are in danger of becoming a caricature of the hopes expressed in 1945. This was to be a forum in which difficult decisions were to be taken: it has become a means to avoid them. When there is crisis, we have endless debate. When there is a need for hard compromise, we draft resolutions which defy agreement.
Our publics are sensible. They want peace and prosperity and justice. They judge the United Nations by what we do together, not by what we say separately. They want results, not speeches. They hear our constant refrain about the need to perform - but if we have stopped listening to ourselves, they too will soon stop listening. The place to start is with administrative and financial reforms. Obviously, putting our house in order will not put the world in order, but it will protect and strengthen the only organization that can. Canada is a strong friend of the United Nations, but Canadians who are making sacrifices at home do not want to subsidize inefficiency here.
To be sure, there will be resistance to reform. There always is. We either face it down, or risk slipping back into the shadows from which we emerged with so much hope in 1945. I cannot believe that any of us here would contemplate such a future with equanimity. None of us pretends that even a fully reformed United Nations will extinguish racism, unleash a global economic boom or put an immediate end to every regional conflict. Yet we all know the kinds of contribution that United Nations agreements can make to international peace, prosperity and social advancement. Resolution 242 (1967), the law of the sea, and the Declaration and Covenants on human rights are but three that come immediately to mind, (spoke in French)
In this International Year of Peace, we shall more than ever before be judged by our achievements in the fields of disarmament and arms control. All the members of the international community will, like Canada, applaud the resumption of dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union. President Reagan informed us of an exchange of letters with General-Secretary Gorbachev regarding new proposals on arms control. We welcome with satisfaction this direct and open participation of the two leaders in the negotiation process. The talks held last week by the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Shultz, and the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shevardnadze, also contributed to improving the atmosphere of the relations between the two super-Powers. We can all cherish the hope that the resumption in Geneva of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the limitation of nuclear weapons and the use of outer space will make some progress possible. We are encouraged by the greater flexibility recently shown by the two parties in their efforts to achieve the shared objective of sharp reductions in nuclear weapons - reductions which will allow for the strengthening of the strategic balance and an increase in international security, (continued in English)
The current focus of attention on nuclear arms reductions should not, however, detract from the necessity of similar progress in the field of conventional arms control. The results of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe have also added to the sense of momentum towards greater security and co-operation in East-West relations. Stockholm represents a signal accomplishment in bringing new openness and predictability to the conduct of military affairs in Europe.
The establishment of agreed procedures for air and ground on-site inspections is a landmark achievement which could serve as a productive precedent for other arms-control negotiations. Canada, with its record of promoting constructive verification solutions, derives special satisfaction from having contributed to that outcome. It should facilitate the movement to the negotiation of more extensive measures of military restraint and reductions.
Such signs of hope should spur the United Nations to tackle the broad range of important arms-control questions before it. Progress on one issue can unlock progress on others.
Canada will strive for a ban on chemical weapons. We will continue to work to ensure that outer space is developed for peaceful purposes. We will be seeking to play an active role in strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Canada will again be supporting a comprehensive nuclear-test ban. That is a fundamental goal and one towards which concrete steps can and should be taken now. Canada welcomes President Reagan's undertaking that the United States of America is prepared first to move forward on ratification of the threshold test-ban treaty and the treaty on peaceful nuclear explosions and then to take subsequent measures to limit further and ultimately to end nuclear testing.
We urge all nations to co-operate and, indeed, participate in the development of the verification techniques needed to provide the confidence necessary to ratify those agreements, which will enable us to plan the subsequent steps we must take in all areas of arms control. For verification is not just a question of technical capacity; it is a question of the political will to reach agreement on the application of technologies and techniques. In this spirit and in co-operation with others Canada will continue to work vigorously towards real progress on verification.
A further critical task facing the United Nations is to buttress the international trade and payments system, now under great strain, and to stimulate the growth so desperately needed in much of the developing world. We are making some progress. Canada is encouraged by movement forward on the elaboration of the Baker Plan and by the agreement of Economic Summit countries at Tokyo to co-ordinate their economic policies more effectively. We particularly welcomed the unanimity of the agreement reached in the meeting of the countries of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to launch a new round - the Uruguay round -of multilateral trade negotiations.Those are all welcome signs of a growing recognition that we must work together in pursuit of a sound and fair international economic system.*
A raison d'etre of this Organization is to create a more humane world. The most fundamental human rights embodied in the Charter and in United Nations human-rights documents are being systematically and grossly violated in a number-of Member countries. The reports of Amnesty International are an indictment of our age. In Afghanistan, a whole people has been tyrannized and millions of citizens made refugees. Around the world and every day people are being tortured and killed for their political and religious beliefs.
One of the most distressing trends of the past year has been the deterioration of the situation in South Africa. The Government of that country has stubbornly refused to dismantle the abhorrent regime of apartheid and to adopt a system that respects human rights for all its people. It has instead imposed a draconian state of emergency. We have seen hundreds of deaths and more than 10,000 detainees.
The South African Government's repressive policies can have no outcome other than more violence and, in the end, a cataclysm in which all South Africans, white
and non-white, will suffer grievously. That would be tragic for a country so blessed in human and material resources.
Canada has worked to intensify the international community's pressure against apartheid and has helped mobilize the special capacities of the Commonwealth to try to stop the destruction of southern Africa. Canada is implementing all the sanctions agreed to by six Commonwealth leaders in London last month. But pressure will only be fully effective if the international community stands as one, and I urge all countries, especially those with significant economic relations with South Africa, to implement further concrete measures on an urgent basis, (spoke in French)
International terrorism threatens us all, and we must act jointly to fight it. The United Nations, acting in a manner that should characterize all of its activities, has set forth that goal and met that need during the past year. All Member States are in agreement regarding the threat posed by international terrorism. During the last session the Security Council unanimously and unequivocally condemned all acts of hostage-taking and kidnapping. At that same session the General Assembly unanimously condemned all acts, methods and practices of terrorism, wherever and by whomever committed. At that time, the Organization rose to the occasion admirably.
Those declarations must, of course, be accompanied by concrete and specific measures. Canada, along with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), has launched an initiative designed to consolidate the structure of international law against terrorism. We propose the conclusion of an agreement under which all parties would undertake to pursue and to extradite all persons perpetrating acts of violence in international airports. I am sure that the international community will give that initiative its full support. I am also convinced that the collective will of the Members of the United Nations, expressed through concrete measures of this type, will be decisive in our joint struggle against this scourge of our era. (continued in English)
I have touched on only a few of the issues with which the United Nations will have to grapple at this and future sessions. Difficult as these are, I remain confident that this institution can serve our common needs and serve them well. We have only to give it the means and the direction. Canadians, for their part, wish to have a strong United Nations capable of dealing pragmatically and effectively with global issues. At this session the Canadian delegation will be seeking every opportunity to join with like-minded States in realizing that goal. If I have dwelt on the need for reform, it is because I am convinced that it is still within our grasp.
I can think of no better way to conclude than by recalling the words of my distinguished Canadian predecessor, Lester Pearson. At the eighteenth session of the General Assembly in 1963, he said:
'the United Nations alone serves us all. It provides the only world assembly to protect and advance human rights and freedoms and human welfare, to reduce and remove the causes of conflict. ...whether it discharges that great role and fulfills its great responsibilities, depends on us. When the United Nations fails, its Member Governments fail. When it succeeds, all the plain and good people of the world succeed.' 
﻿I would like, through
you, Sir, to congratulate Jan Kavan on his election as
President of the General Assembly and to assure him of
our delegation's cooperation as he undertakes his
important responsibilities this year.
Yesterday, people the world over paused to
remember the victims of the tragic events of one year
ago. I had the opportunity of attending the interfaith
service yesterday, where the President of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General spoke movingly
about how the commemoration of that event must
reinforce this institution's vocation as the forum
dedicated to world peace.
Canadians entirely subscribe to the sentiments
that were there expressed. The attacks of last
September were a cruel and devastating blow to the
United States and, indeed, to us all. I am proud to say
that Canadians stood in solidarity with our closest ally
at that terrible moment. When the terrorists struck that
day, they were also attacking the very principles of
international law, security and humanitarianism that are
embodied in the United Nations Charter. We believe
that our ultimate response to the challenges of 11
September is thus to rededicate ourselves to our beliefs
and to the principles upon which the United Nations
was founded.
(spoke in French)
Now, more than ever, the main challenge for each
of our countries and for the United Nations is to
manage our interdependence. Environmental
degradation and endemic poverty, the proliferation of
disease and epidemics, the increasing threat of
terrorism and organized crime  these are serious,
complex issues that no one nation can confront alone.
To succeed, our countries must work together, while
also drawing on the expertise of civil society. Such
interaction is a formidable challenge and one that the
United Nations is best suited to meet.
Recognition of our interdependence in no way
threatens our respective sovereignty. In fact, it gives
each of us even more tangible means to act and to
succeed through the sharing of our information,
resources and initiatives.
The principles of multilateralism are articulated
with vigour and resolve in the Millennium Declaration,
which assigns a decisive role to the United Nations
Charter  and rightly so, for it is much more than our
constitution. Indeed, it is our heart and soul. It
reconciles national interests with the highest moral and
ethical standards that must govern the actions of each
State. For us, the Charter is the key to unlock the door
to the world of peace, security and justice that we hope
to build.
The terrorist threat leads us to work together and,
tragically, illustrates the extent of our interdependence.
It demonstrates the urgency of finding solutions that
are equal to the task at hand and whose effectiveness
hinges on new partnerships among our countries. Our
reaction to terrorism must be steadfast, to be sure, and
we must make no concession to the agents of terror, but
if we want our reaction to be truly effective, it must
enhance both national security and respect for basic
rights. In fact, democratic governance and security find
their most solid foundation in societies in which rights
and freedoms are respected and where, as a result,
dissidence more often than not takes constructive,
rather than violent forms.
What is more, the fight against terrorism
challenges us to find ways to open our hearts and
minds to the diversity of our world, its cultures and its
religions. Now more than ever, we must promote
dialogue, understanding and tolerance with respect to
other people. In this way, we will help to eradicate at
its source much of the pain that all too often translates
26

into rising hatred, extremism and fanaticism of all
sorts.
Multilateralism has definitely proven its worth
over the past year. For example, dozens of countries
have offered their resources and experience to
Afghanistan as members of the coalition against
terrorism or of the Afghanistan Support Group. They
have also contributed to the various United Nations
programmes seeking to establish political stability and
representative Government.
The G8 Global Partnership Against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, concluded
at Kananaskis in June, is another concrete example of
our joint commitment to battling terrorism and other
threats to peace. Canada, as Chair of the G8, was a
strong advocate of this major effort designed to
strengthen international security and strategic stability.
Canada will continue to work to make this initiative a
success.
At all times, Canada is ready to offer its support
wherever it is needed and we encourage the
international community to continue to do likewise. We
also believe that the multilateral approach is useful in
addressing the obvious challenges posed by sustainable
development. In this regard, the consensus that
emerged from the Monterrey Conference calls on all
countries to work together to forge broader
partnerships between developed and developing
countries.
In this regard, the situation in Africa cries out for
action. For too long now, inaction has taken a heavy
toll in terms of human suffering. However, hope is
beginning to shine through. The New Partnership for
Africa's Development, devised by African leaders
determined to meet the challenges of self-development
and endorsed at Canada's urging-during the G8 summit
in Kananaskis, seeks to provide the people of Africa
with conditions founded on good governance and
democracy, while ending their marginalization and
offering them the chance to achieve prosperity.
As we meet here today, the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis remains at its all too familiar impasse, despite the
fact that everyone knows what is needed to restore
peace. We all know that the targeting of civilians must
stop, that the security of Israel must be assured, that
settlement-building must end, that the humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian people must be met, that the
Palestinian Authority must reform itself democratically
and that the peace negotiations must resume. We all
know, in sum, that a road to a peaceful future must be
built, a future in which two independent, viable, secure
and democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace and security.
Canada calls on the Palestinian Authority and the
Government of Israel to start back on the road to peace.
The people and the Government of Canada will
accompany them and support them every step of the
way.
We also meet here today in an atmosphere of
deepening tension caused by Iraq's continued flouting
of the will of the international community and by the
differing opinions that prevail around us on how to
address this situation and bring the crisis to a close. Let
there be no doubt: at the origin of today's tensions is
the persistent refusal of the Iraqi Government to
comply with its obligations to us all under Security
Council resolutions. For the past seven years, Iraq has
refused to demonstrate that it has abandoned its
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programmes,
and it remains even today unwilling to do so. But let
there also be no doubt that bringing Iraq into
conformity with its international obligations must be
the work of us all acting together.
We believe that our ability to find a solution to
this challenge, one that is consistent with and, indeed,
that reinforces the international framework that we
have so painstakingly constructed since the last
devastating World War, will define this generation and
create precedents that may determine the future
direction of the world. It is with this in mind that
Canada welcomes the powerful message delivered here
today by President Bush affirming his country's
commitment to work with the Security Council in
resolving this serious threat to our collective peace and
security.
We therefore urge Iraq to seize this opportunity
without delay, and to grant immediate and
unconditional access to United Nations weapons
inspectors in compliance with its Security Council
obligations. The onus is clearly on the Government of
Iraq to take this step now. The onus is equally on us to
ensure that our international institutions emerge from
this crisis reinforced and strengthened.
Such institutions may well be new, as in the case
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), a body that
has the potential to ensure the integrity of our
27

international legal system, upon which so much
depends for the peaceful resolution of our differences.
This week I had the privilege of attending the inaugural
meeting of the Assembly of States Parties here in New
York with many in this Hall and was encouraged by the
depth of international political and public support that
exists for this important new body.
The people of the world want an end to impunity.
They insist that their leaders no longer turn a blind eye
to gross violations of international humanitarian law
like those we witnessed in the past century. Immunity
from the law is simply no longer acceptable. The States
parties to the ICC Statute are more than willing to put
into action the proposition that we can best enforce
rules of law that we have arrived at by our common
accord   those indeed that we are willing to have
invoked against us as well. For the 79 States parties
that attended the Assembly of States Parties and the
many observer States close to ratifying the Rome
Statute, our objective remains to work resolutely and
cooperatively to make the Court a reality.
The International Criminal Court represents a
major change in the way the world works. The times
we live in demand many such innovative approaches.
For example, in response to a call from the Secretary-
General, Canada, along with others, launched the
independent International Commission on Intervention
and State Sovereignty. Its landmark report, entitled
`The Responsibility to Protect', has shifted the
parameters of the debate from divisions over
intervention toward agreement on the responsibility of
a State to protect its people. The report holds that
sovereignty entails responsibilities as well as rights:
that sovereignty is responsibility. When States are
unable or unwilling to afford protection to their own
people, the international community has a
responsibility to step in temporarily and to provide that
protection. The report represents, in our view, an
opportunity for us to reinforce the United Nations in its
collective security mission. It also provides an
occasion to affirm the fundamental norm-building role
of the United Nations and to find better ways to
prevent and, where necessary, alleviate human
suffering.
Part of our shared responsibility to raise the
credibility of multilateral institutions is to address their
shortcomings, including those of the United Nations
itself. We are greatly encouraged that the Secretary-
General and his Deputy, Louise FrÈchette, are
proposing far-reaching organizational reforms. They
can count on Canada's support. We also support reform
in other areas, notably in respect to the nearly
moribund Disarmament Commission and its glacial
progress on issues of non-proliferation, arms control
and disarmament, where recent gains such as the
United Nations Programme of Action on small arms
and light weapons and the negotiations on an
international code of conduct on missiles are being
overshadowed by a myriad of compliance problems.
Certainly, there are problems with multilateralism
and the institutions we have created, but that should
not cause us to doubt the desirability of an effective
rules-based system. Our objective should be to address
these shortcomings where we see them and reform
what we must, and in the process answer the criticisms
of those suspicious of an interdependent world. We will
persuade the sceptics only by building better
institutions to implement the international rule of law
and globally arrived-at solutions to our common
problems.
Let us therefore embrace cooperation, not
division. Let us expand our sovereignty by pooling it.
Let us be partners in the larger enterprise of building
peace and freedom. No one country can meet all the
challenges of our times on its own. Let us have
confidence in our common humanity. Let us make the
United Nations our principal instrument of peace. I
pledge to the Assembly today that Canada will spare no
effort in so doing.










﻿We meet one year and one day
after a terrorist attack brought grief to my country and
brought grief to many citizens of our world. Yesterday,
we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible
morning. Today we turn to the urgent duty of
protecting other lives without illusion and without fear.
We have accomplished much in the last year — in
Afghanistan and beyond. We have much yet to do — in
Afghanistan and beyond. Many nations represented
here have joined in the fight against global terror, and
the people of the United States are grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that
survived a world war — the hope of a world moving
towards justice, escaping old patterns of conflict and
fear. The founding Members resolved that the peace of
the world must never again be destroyed by the will
and the wickedness of any man. We created the United
Nations Security Council so that, unlike the League of
Nations, our deliberations would be more than talk, our
resolutions would be more than wishes. After
generations of deceitful dictators, broken treaties and
squandered lives, we dedicated ourselves to standards
of human dignity, shared by all, and to a system of
security defended by all.
Today, these standards, and this security, are
challenged.
Our commitment to human dignity is challenged
by persistent poverty and raging disease. The suffering
is great, and our responsibilities are clear. The United
States is joining with the world to supply aid where it
reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and
the prosperity it brings, and to bring medical care
where it is desperately needed.
As a symbol of our commitment to human
dignity, the United States will return to the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). This organization has been
reformed, and America will participate fully in its
mission to advance human rights, tolerance and
learning.
Our common security is challenged by regional
conflicts — ethnic and religious strife that is ancient,
but not inevitable. In the Middle East, there can be no
peace for either side without freedom for both sides.
America stands committed to an independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Like all other people, Palestinians
deserve a government that serves their interests and
listens to their voices. My nation will continue to
encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities
as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the
conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are
challenged today by outlaw groups and regimes that
accept no law of morality and have no limit to their
violent ambitions. In the attacks on America a year
ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies.
This threat hides within many nations, including my
own. In cells and camps, terrorists are plotting further
destruction and are building new bases for their war
against civilization. And our greatest fear is that
terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions
when an outlaw regime supplies them with the
technologies enabling them to kill on a massive scale.
In one place, in one regime, we find all these
dangers, in their most lethal and aggressive forms —
exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations
was born to confront. Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded
Kuwait without provocation. And the regime's forces
were poised to continue their march to seize other
countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein
been appeased instead of stopped, he would have
endangered the peace and stability of the world. Yet,
this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition
forces and the will of the United Nations.
In order to suspend hostilities and to spare
himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of
commitments. The terms were clear to him, and to all.
And he agreed to prove that he is complying with every
one of those obligations. He has proven instead only
his contempt for the United Nations and for all his
pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions
and by his cruelties, Saddam Hussein has made the
case against himself.
In 1991, Security Council resolution 688 (1991)
demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once the
repression of its own people, including the systematic
repression of minorities, which the Council said,
“threaten[ed] international peace and security in the
region”.
This demand goes ignored. Last year, the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq
continues to commit extremely grave violations of
human rights and that the regime's repression is all
pervasive. Tens of thousands of political opponents and
7

ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest
and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by
beating, burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation
and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands;
children in the presence of their parents; and all of
these horrors are concealed from the world by the
apparatus of a totalitarian State.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through its resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991),
demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait
and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this
promise. Last year the Secretary-General's high-level
coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti, Saudi,
Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini,
and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for — more
than 600 people. One American pilot is among them.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through resolution 687 (1991), demanded that Iraq
renounce all involvement with terrorism and permit no
terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq's regime
agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), Iraq continues to
shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct
violence against Iran, Israel, and Western
Governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for
murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Emir
of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq's
Government openly praised the attacks of 11
September. Al-Qaida terrorists have escaped from
Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq.
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and to
stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and
long-range missiles, and to prove to the world it has
done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq
has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge.
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had
no biological weapons. After a senior official in its
weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the
regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of
litres of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for
use in Scud missile warheads, aerial bombs and aircraft
spray tanks. United Nations inspectors believe Iraq has
produced two to four times the amount of biological
agents it declared and has failed to account for more
than three metric tons of material that could be used to
produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is
expanding and improving facilities that were used for
the production of biological weapons.
United Nations inspections also reveal that Iraq
likely maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard and other
chemical agents, and that the regime is rebuilding and
expanding facilities capable of producing chemical
weapons.
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq
finally admitted that it had had a crash nuclear
weapons programme prior to the Gulf war. We know
now that, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq
would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later
than 1993.
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important
information about its nuclear programme: weapons
design, procurement logs, experiment data, an
accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of
foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear
scientists and technicians. It retains physical
infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq
has made several attempts to buy high-strength
aluminium tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear
weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would
be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And
Iraq's State-controlled media have reported numerous
meetings between Saddam Hussein and his nuclear
scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued
appetite for these weapons.
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles
with ranges beyond the 150 kilometres permitted by the
United Nations. Work at testing and production
facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range
missiles that can inflict mass death throughout the
region.
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the
world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Those
sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the
regime's compliance with Security Council resolutions.
In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy
food. Saddam Hussein has subverted that programme,
working around the sanctions to buy missile
technology and military materials. He blames the
suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even
as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for
himself and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to
comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for
the hunger and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens.
In 1991, Iraq promised United Nations inspectors
immediate and unrestricted access to verify Iraq's
commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass
8

destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke that
promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading and
harassing United Nations inspectors before ceasing
cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991
ceasefire, the Security Council twice renewed its
demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with
inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of its
obligations. The Security Council again renewed that
demand in 1994 and twice more in 1996, deploring
Iraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security
Council renewed its demand three more times in 1997,
citing flagrant violations, and three more times in
1998, calling Iraq's behaviour totally unacceptable.
And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again.
As we meet today, it has been almost four years
since the last United Nations inspector set foot in
Iraq — four years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to
build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. We know
that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder
even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to
assume that he stopped when they left? The history, the
logic and the facts lead to one conclusion. Saddam
Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger. To
suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To
assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of
millions and the peace of the world in a reckless
gamble. And that is a risk we must not take.
We have been more than patient. We have tried
sanctions. We have tried the carrot of oil-for-food and
the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam
Hussein has defied all those efforts and continues to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The first time we
may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is
when, God forbid, he uses one. We owe it to all our
citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that
day from coming.
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the
authority of the United Nations and a threat to peace.
Iraq has answered a decade of United Nations demands
with a decade of defiance. All the world now faces a
test and the United Nations a difficult and defining
moment. Are Security Council resolutions to be
honoured and enforced or cast aside without
consequence? Will the United Nations serve the
purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant?
The United States helped found the United
Nations. We want the United Nations to be effective
and respected and successful. We want the resolutions
of the world's most important multilateral body to be
enforced, and right now those resolutions are being
unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our
partnership of nations can meet the test before us by
making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose
and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction,
long-range missiles and all related material.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all support for terrorism and act to
suppress it, as all States are required to do by Security
Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease
persecution of its civilian population, including Shia,
Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans and others — again, as
required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or
account for all Gulf war personnel whose fate is still
unknown. It will return the remains of any who are
deceased, return stolen property, accept liability for
losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait and fully
cooperate with international efforts to resolve those
issues, as required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food
programme. It will accept United Nations
administration of funds from that programme, to ensure
that the money is used fairly and promptly for the
benefit of the Iraqi people.
If all those steps are taken, it will signal a new
openness and accountability in Iraq. And it could open
the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a
Government that represents all Iraqis — a Government
based on respect for human rights, economic liberty
and internationally supervised elections.
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi
people. They have suffered too long in silent captivity.
Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a
great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it. The
security of all nations requires it.
Free societies do not intimidate through cruelty
and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the
world with mass murder. The United States supports
political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq.
9

We can harbour no illusions, and that is important
today to remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in
1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He has fired ballistic
missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Israel.
His regime once ordered the killing of every person
between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish
villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians
and 40 Iraqi villages.
My nation will work with the Security Council to
meet our common challenge. If Iraq's regime defies us
again, the world must move deliberately and decisively
to hold Iraq to account. We will work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions. But the purposes
of the United States should not be doubted. The
Security Council resolutions will be enforced, and the
just demands of peace and security will be met, or
action will be unavoidable, and a regime that has lost
its legitimacy will also lose its power.
Events can turn in one of two ways.
If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people
of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. The
regime will have new power to bully, dominate and
conquer its neighbours, condemning the Middle East to
more years of bloodshed and fear. The region will
remain unstable, with little hope of freedom, and
isolated from the progress of our times. With every step
the Iraqi regime takes towards gaining and deploying
the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront
that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regime
were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies, then
the attacks of 11 September would be a prelude to far
greater horrors.
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome
this danger, we can arrive at a very different future.
The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They
can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a
democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the
Muslim world. These nations can show by their
example that honest government, respect for women,
and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph
in the Middle East and beyond. We will show that the
promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our
time.
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have
been set before us. We must choose between a world of
fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and
do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand up for
our security and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States
of America will make that stand. Representatives to the
United Nations have the power to make that stand as
well.




Mr. President, let me express, at the outset of my remarks, the pleasure and confidence that the Government of Canada derives from the fact that you have been elected to preside over this session of the General Assembly. This session marks the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, and its proceedings could not be entrusted lo more capable hands. We know that you will bring to the deliberations of this global Organization the judgment and wisdom which the councils of Europe have been for so long the beneficiaries.
2.	We are pleased to welcome among us the delegations from Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique following the accession of those States to membership in the United Nations. Their presence here represents a further important step by this Organization on the road towards universality of membership,
3.	You are, Mr. President, taking office at a time when our Organization is at a decisive juncture in international affairs. Increasingly, our preoccupations are with global economic and social disparities and opportunities. These are also political questions of grave concern comparable, and indeed related in scope and importance, to those of international peace and security.
4.	Last week, at our seventh special session on these very issues, we at last made some headway towards the reduction of these disparities. We agreed on steps necessary to move towards a new international economic order. We were able to agree because the time was ripe indeed overripe to move forward in a creative way on these complex issues.
5.	We must now commit our attention and energies to sustaining this will and to implementing the decisions that we have taken to reform our world economic system to reflect our interdependence. We must recognize, too, our respective peoples' need to be brought into these efforts. We have given undertakings on their behalf, undertakings to provide those of the world's peoples who constitute a majority those who are in want their full measure of social and economic justice.
6.	I think we all appreciate the urgency of this funda-mental task; otherwise, we would not have achieved the remarkable degree of co-operation which characterized our intense and most serious efforts during the special session. It is important that we pursue our objective and we have only just begun in the same spirit of co-operation and mutual respect. This is the most effective way for our Organization to work. This is also the most effective way to ensure that our peoples retain their confidence in our Organization's ability to solve our urgent and overriding problems.
7.	We know clearly that there is a need to enhance the role and capacity of the United Nations in the economic and social fields and thus bring them into a better and more balanced relationship with the political objectives and functions of the Organization.
8.	At its seventh special session the General Assembly established an Ad Hoc Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the United Nations System to initiate a restructuring process of this very kind. One of the main documents before it will be the report of the Group of Experts on the Structure of the United Nations System, entitled A New United Nations Structure for Global Economic Co-operation.' The experts have correctly identified the main weaknesses of the United Nations system and have made a number of recommendations and suggestions which would improve the balance between the functional, sectoral and political elements in the system.
9.	I should like to commend to the new intergovernmental committee as well the report of a group of experts convened by the member States of the Commonwealth entitled, 'Towards a New International Economic Order', which has been circulated as a United Nations document.
10.	Convinced as we are that the United Nations must be made more responsive to the needs and concerns of its Members, my Government intends to play an active and constructive part in the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization so that it may carry forward its Programs in working towards a new economic order.
11.	The building of a new international economic order is but one of the many important preoccupations of the international community at the present time.
Population, food, human settlements and the law of the sea are other global problems that demand the attention of the United Nations. Of these many global problems, I should like now to speak about the law of the sea, in which Canada plays a particular role.
12.	One of the most important but least recognized functions of the United Nations is the regular and persistent efforts it makes to contribute to a stable world order through the progressive development of international law. The law of the sea is a dynamic example.
13.	We are developing new rules which reflect the growing awareness of the interdependence of nations and the need for preservation of the marine environment and the conservation of its resources. I have no hesitation in affirming the view of the Canadian Government that the viability of an increasingly interdependent world order rests on the creation of an international economic system which provides a more equitable distribution of resources and opportunities to all people. This principle must be reflected in the new law of the sea.
14.	The role of the United Nations is central to the process of developing a new body of international law which will reflect broad recognition that the oceans of the world, which cover 70 per cent of the earth's surface, are vital to man's survival. Binding legal rules must be established. The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has already achieved broad agreement on revolutionary new legal concepts, such as the economic zone and the common heritage of mankind, concepts which must form the basis of the constitution of the seas. The new law must lay down duties to go hand in hand with every new right recognized. It must be based on principles of equity rather than power.
15.	The task is a formidable one and may prove to be beyond the reach of the United Nations. I think not. What is clear, however, is that without the United Nations the task would be impossible and the world would be involved in a series of conflicting claims and counter-claims which could produce serious threats to peace.
16.	My Government is now preparing for the crucial fourth round of negotiations of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea beginning here in New York next March. We do so knowing that to reach final agreement all participants must act responsibly, flexibly and, above all, with a real sense of urgency.
17.	No Government is more committed than my own to achieving agreement on a viable and balanced global regime for the seas. But I would be less than candid if I did not state clearly that the Canadian Government, like many other Governments, cannot be expected to wait indefinitely for agreement. I hope our actions have demonstrated that the Canadian Government is conscious of its responsibilities to the international community. But the Canadian Government is also conscious of its responsibilities to the Canadian people. The economic and social survival of whole communities in certain coastal areas of Canada depends on the successful outcome of the Conference or, failing such success, some alternative course of action. It is because of these national and international responsibilities that my Government is now engaged, as a matter of the utmost priority, in a series of talks with countries fishing off our coasts to prepare the way for an extension of our fisheries jurisdiction based upon the consensus emerging at the Conference.
18.	I wish to reiterate the faith of the Canadian Government in the United Nations and the opportunity it offers to negotiate multilateral solutions to the complex problems of the law of the sea. A multilateral agreement would be of lasting benefit to this and future generations. Only if the multilateral approach fails and at a certain point further delay or procrastination is failure will my Government and, I assume, other Governments resort to other solutions to protect fundamental national interests. The Governments and peoples of the world are not prepared to wait much longer for the results of the Conference. We must act quickly and in concert. If we do and I am convinced we can we shall achieve what the Secretary- General has rightly called 'one of the most important conventions ever devised by the international community'.
19.	In 1945 the founders of the United Nations, profoundly influenced by the holocaust of war, were determined that the central task of the international Organization would be the maintenance of international peace and security. They devised so they believed a system for the settlement of disputes between nations without recourse to the use of force. Thirty years later this fundamental problem still faces the United Nations. Two crucial aspects of this problem are disarmament and peace-keeping. These aspects of the problem were the principal themes of my address to the Assembly last year, but such is their importance that I make no apology for reverting to them.
20.	Few issues before this Assembly give rise to aspirations so great or frustrations so deep as the question of disarmament. We aspire to agreements that will check the use of force, reduce tensions and free resources for productive social and economic purposes. But our hopes are frustrated by the relentless drive towards new heights of destructive power. Nuclear weapons exist in the tens of thousands and we are faced with the frightening possibility that they will spread to more countries. The advanced countries continue to spend enormous amounts of money on armaments of all kinds, and the military expenditures of some developing countries are rapidly increasing.
21.	Is it any wonder that ordinary people everywhere, with deep unease and impatience, await real progress towards disarmament?
22.	The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have been of major importance in promoting a climate of strategic stability and political detente. But they have not halted the competition in nuclear armaments. Nor have they achieved steps of actual nuclear disarmament.
23.	The problems involved are infinitely complex, but the need for solutions is pressing. We urge the United States and the Soviet Union to conclude their present negotiations and to proceed without delay to achieving steps of nuclear disarmament. We also urge the nuclear-weapons Powers to re-examine the technical and political obstacles to an agreement to end nuclear-weapons testing.
24.	Efforts to curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be accompanied by efforts to ensure that the further dissemination of nuclear technology is devoted solely to peaceful purposes. The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons reaffirmed the Treaty's vital role as the basic instrument of the non- proliferation system. It made clear that all parties, both nuclear-weapons States and non-nuclear-weapons States, must meet their obligations fully under the Treaty. This is essential if the dangers of proliferation are to be averted.
25.	The Review Conference also reaffirmed the role of the Treaty as the basis for wider co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Canada will fulfill its obligations under the Treaty to facilitate, to the extent it is able, international co-operation in the exchange of nuclear technology and materials for peaceful purposes, particularly between the advanced and developing countries. The need for such co-operation has clearly been increased by the change in world energy costs.
26.	However, I would at the same time stress that we have an obligation to ensure that the co-operation we enter into does not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons or to the manufacture of nuclear explosive devices for whatever purposes.
27.	Preoccupation with the dangers of nuclear weapons must not blind us to the growing threat from use of conventional force. Urgent and closer attention must now be given to the search for arms control and the reduction of forces in order to promote regional stability and mutual security. Now that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has been concluded, we look for substantial progress from the negotiations in Vienna on the reduction of forces in Central Europe.
28.	The basic responsibility for reducing the dangers and burdens of armaments rests primarily with the major military Powers. But we must recognize the various constraints under which they operate if we wish effective arms limitation and disarmament agreements. Advances in military technology often complicate efforts to find the technical and military basis for agreement and satisfactory means of verifying commitments. Agreements must promote or be compatible with the security interests of participating States. Disarmament negotiations are unlikely to succeed unless political conditions are conducive to progress.
29.	But that is no argument for inaction in this Assembly. It is no argument for accepting the present and totally unsatisfactory rate of progress in achieving disarmament measures. The General Assembly must continue as the forum of international concern and as a spur to action in the field of disarmament.
30.	If our anxiety about the prospects for progress in disarmament continues unrelieved, we can draw some comfort from the recent movement towards peaceful settlement in the Middle East. No one who has the interests of world security at heart can fail to be encouraged by the statesmanlike conduct of the leaders of Egypt and Israel, which produced the new interim Sinai agreement. We also recognize the dedication of the United States Secretary of State, whose tireless efforts have once again contributed towards a positive result. It is a fragile beginning, to be sure. By itself, it does little to settle the underlying issues; and these issues must be resolved if peace and security are to come to the Middle East. But we see in the agreement grounds for hope. We see the agreement as the first stage in a series of interlocking negotiations and agreements which would involve all the parties to the dispute and embrace all the fundamental issues, difficult though this will be. The end would be a just settlement which would enable the destructive passions of the past to be overcome and permit all peoples in the area to live as neighbors in peace and security.
31.	For all those concerned about United Nations peace-keeping there is another reason for drawing satisfaction from the Sinai agreement. Peace-keeping is one of the few useful instruments that the international community has developed to help promote peaceful solutions to disputes. It is designed to assist the parties to a dispute to draw back from conflict when they recognize that this is in their best interests and to help create circumstances in which their differences can be settled by negotiation.
32.	But all too often peace-keeping reduces the incentives of the disputants to move beyond the mere cessation of hostilities to a serious search for a political settlement. Consequently skeptics charge that United Nations peace-keeping does little more than perpetuate an uneasy status quo.
33.	If peace-keeping is to be truly effective it must be accompanied by a parallel effort on the political level, especially by the parties most directly concerned, to convert the temporary peace that a peacekeeping force is asked to maintain, into something more durable.
34.	Since the initial cease-fire agreement in the fall of 1973, the United Nations Emergency Force [UNEF] has fulfilled its task of providing a buffer between the disputants and of helping to produce a period of relative calm in which negotiations could be pursued. The parties concerned took full advantage of the peace-keeping operation: they negotiated and reached a new interim agreement. The significance of this for peace-keeping is that UNEF has not merely perpetuated the status quo\ it will now go on to make the new agreement effective and to provide the basis for further steps in peace-keeping. In short, UNEF is doing the job for which it is intended, that is, helping to create the circumstances for a search, at the political level, for a solution to the Middle East problem.
35.	The United Nations Disengagement Observer Force has also played its part in helping to create an atmosphere in which further negotiations can take place.
36.	The question of Cyprus is once again before us at the thirtieth session. The problems are complex and will engage the attention of all delegations. Here again, the effectiveness of the peace-keeping force which has been carrying on its task on the ground in conditions of great difficulty will depend essentially on the co-operation and will of the parties directly concerned.
37.	Peace-keeping can only continue, of course, if it has the full support of all Member States, including their practical support in the form of prompt payment of peace-keeping assessments and contributions. Without the necessary financial resources, neither the United Nations nor individual force contributors can be expected to carry the responsibilities they have been asked to assume.
38.	I should like to comment now on one particular problem affecting the management of the affairs of our evolving Organization. Efforts have been made over the years to treat technical problems and political issues separately. The specialized agencies and technical conferences have been mainly devoted to their own immediate concerns, while political issues have been discussed primarily in those organs with the competence to deal with such matters the Security Council and the General Assembly.
39.	We well recognize that, even in technical conferences, Member States must take account of political realities, and that in some cases the line of separation between the political and technical cannot always be too rigidly drawn, But we shall do a serious disservice to our system of co-operation within the United Nations system if we fail to distinguish in a clear and unmistakable manner between, on the one hand, the authority and competence of the Security Council and the General Assembly in those political fields prescribed by the Charter, and, on the other, the competence and authority of technical conferences in their respective fields.
40.	In the meantime, it is the hope of my Government that in the spirit of co-operation that has so happily characterized the deliberations of the seventh special session, we shall all voluntarily refrain from the introduction of unrelated political considerations into the proceedings of the specialized agencies as well as the organs that have been assigned specific responsibility for implementing the decisions of the special session. We should allow these bodies to get on with their technical work. That would surely be in the best interests of each United Nations Member and of the Organization as a whole.
41.	The celebration of the thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations prompts all of us to reflect upon the place of this Organization in the life of the international community. Its critics have been many and persistent; its supporters sometimes wavering. But, whatever its short-comings over the years, we must recognize the simple fact that, in our quest for peace and security and our search for solutions to the great economic and social issues of our time, this universal forum is irreplaceable, and is essential to each of the Governments and peoples we represent.
'It is widely acknowledged that in our present world there is no rational alternative in international relations to the principles and procedures of the United Nations. Discussion and compromise are the only known alternatives to oppression, conflict and bloodshed. Unilateral and bilateral diplomacy are no longer enough and must be supplemented by collective action and multilateral diplomacy. All this has been acknowledged in principle by
Governments of Member States through their adherence to the Charter. As each day passes, (he force of circumstances also compels the Governments of the world to recognize their increasing interdependence. This too has been acknowledged in recent activities at the United Nations and is the clear theme of the sixth and seventh special sessions of the General Assembly.' [Aj100011Add. I, Sect. XXL]
I would also conclude by saying that it is also the clear theme of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.




At the outset, let me say how pleased we are that our deliberations this year take place under the presidency of the Prime Minister of Luxembourg. His contribution to European co-operation, his diplomatic skills,
' his devotion to democracy, give us confidence that this thirtieth session will be marked by a constructive and creative spirit.
63.	I want also to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General, whose fairness, leadership and tireless efforts are dedicated to carrying this Organization forward into a new era of co-operation for world peace.
64.	This century has seen war and cataclysm on an unprecedented scale. It has witnessed the breakdown of established patterns of order and practices of international conduct. It has suffered global economic depression and cycles of famine. It has experienced the birth of thermonuclear weapons, and the proliferation of armaments around the planet.
65.	But this century has also seen the triumph of the principle of self-determination and national independence. A truly global community has begun to evolve, and this development is reflected in a multitude of institutions of international co-operation. We have shaped new methods of peaceful settlement and of arms limitation, and new institutions to promote economic development and to combat hunger and disease world-wide.
66.	As we deliberate the future, an event of potentially vast implications has just been achieved in this Organization: the unanimous agreement produced by the seventh special session of the General Assembly on measures to improve the economic condition of mankind [resolution 3362 (S-VII)].
67.	Despite differences of ideology and of approaches to economic development, the nations assembled here began the move towards the recognition that our interdependence spells either common progress or common disaster; that in our age no nation or group of nations can achieve its aims by pressure or by confrontation and that the attempt to do so would damage everyone. They agreed to transcend the stereotypes of the past in the search for a co-operative future. The seventh special session forged a sense of common purpose based on the equality and co-operation of States. Now we must dedicate ourselves to the implementation of this consensus.
68.	Let us carry forward the spirit of conciliation into the deliberaDigitiZed by Dag HammarSkjoid LibraryLet us address the issues of world peace the foundation of all we do on this planet with this same consciousness of our common destiny. It is our duty to avoid empty slogans and endless recrimination.
69.	Only in a structure of co-operation can disputes be settled and clashes contained. Only in an atmosphere of conciliation can the insecurity of nations, out of which so much conflict arises, be eased, and habits of compromise and accommodation be nurtured. Social progress, justice and human rights can thrive only in an atmosphere of reduced international tension.
70.	The United States stands ready to dedicate itself to co-operative efforts to harmonize the different perspectives of the world community in creating a new sense of security and well-being. We do so, not out of fear, for we are better able to sustain ourselves in situations of confrontation than most other nations. Nor do we do so out of a sense of guilt, for we believe that on the whole we have used our power for constructive ends.
71.	We affirm our common destiny because of our recognition of global interdependence and because global peace requires it. Indeed there is no realistic alternative to shared responsibility in dealing with the international agenda of peace, security, economic well-being and justice.
72.	Let me set forth the views of the United States on the work we face in each of these areas.
73.	Our first and transcendent concern is for peace in the world. Peace is never automatic. It is more than the absence of war. And it is inseparable from security, A world in which the survival of nations is at the mercy of a few would spell oppression and injustice and fear. There can be no security without equilibrium and no safety without restraint.
74.	Only when the rights of nations are respected, when accommodation supplants force, can man's energies be devoted to the realization of his deepest aspirations.
75.	The United States will pursue the cause of peace with patience and an attitude of conciliation in many spheres. We shall nurture and deepen the ties of co-operation with our friends and allies. We shall strive to improve relations with countries of different ideology or political conviction. We shall always stand ready to assist in the settlement of regional disputes. We shall intensify our efforts to halt the spiral of nuclear armaments. We shall strive to improve man's economic and social condition and to strengthen the collaboration between developed and developing nations. And we shall struggle for the realization of fundamental human rights.
76.	America's close ties with the industrial democracies of North America, Western Europe and Japan have been the corner-stone of world stability and peace for three decades. Today, looking beyond immediate security and defence, we are working together on a range of new issues. Through our consultations, we have begun joint efforts to ease inter-national tensions; to co-ordinate our national policies for economic recovery; to work together on common challenges such as energy and the environment; and to address the great issues that concern the developing countries.
77.	In the same spirit, the United States has opened a new dialog with its neighbors in Central and Latin America. We have taken important steps towards resolving major political problems; we have begun close consultations for co-operation in promoting economic and social development. Alliance relations in the Western Hemisphere have a long history and great promise for the future. With imagination and dedication, we can make inter-American co-operation on the tasks of development an example to and a pillar of the global community.
78.	Peace, to be secure, must place on a more durable and reliable basis the relations between the nations possessing the means to destroy our planet.
79.	In recent years, the bipolar confrontation of the last generation has given way to the beginning of dialog and an easing of direct conflict. In this body, of all organizations, there is surely an appreciation of the global importance of lessened tension between the nuclear super-Powers. All nations have a stake in its success. When weapons of mass destruction can span continents in minutes, nuclear conflict threatens the survival of all mankind.
80.	We recognize that the suspicion and rivalry of a generation will not be swept away with a document or a conference. Real ideological and political differences exist. We shall firmly defend our vital interests and those of our friends. But we shall also never lose sight of the fact that in our age peace is a practical necessity and a moral imperative. We shall pursue the relaxation of tensions on the basis of strict reciprocity. We know the difference between posturing and policy; we will not encourage the belief that anyone can benefit from artificial tensions. We are deeply conscious that we owe it to future generations not to be swayed by momentary passions.
81.	The state of United States-Soviet relations today and just a decade ago presents a dramatic contrast. The world is no longer continually shaken by chronic and bitter confrontations. Periodic consultations including those held at the highest level encourage restraint and amplify areas of mutual interest. The forthcoming meeting between the President of the United States, Mr. Ford, and the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, should strengthen this process.
82.	Principles of mutual restraint have been enunciated at various summit meetings; they were reaffirmed by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe two months ago. These principles provide a standard of behavior by which our actions will be tested. If they are observed as we insist and if neither side seeks unilateral advantage, the specter of general war will be lifted not only from our own peoples but from all nations. There can be no more important task before us.
83.	We have likewise pursued more constructive and beneficial relationships with the countries of Eastern Europe. The United States has many traditional and deep-rooted bonds of friendship with the proud peoples of that region. We see widening possibilities for practical co-operation as the barriers between East and West in Europe diminish.

84.	There is no relationship to which the United States assigns greater significance than its new ties with the People's Republic of China. We believe that the well-being and progress of a quarter of humanity is an important element in global stability. The hostility of decades between our two nations has been replaced by a relationship of mutual respect which is now a durable feature of the world scene. It serves not only the interest of our two countries but also the broader interests of peace and stability in Asia and around the world. President Ford plans to visit the People's Republic of China later this year to confirm the vitality of our relationship and to advance the ties between us on the basis of the strict implementation of the Shanghai Communique. We take seriously the process of normalizing our relationship. We are dedicated to pursuing it.
85.	The world community must find a way to contain or resolve regional conflicts before they spread into global confrontation. Nowhere has the danger been greater than in the Middle East. Nowhere has the need for persistent and imaginative negotiation between suspicious rivals been more evident. Nowhere is there greater promise of moving from perennial crisis towards peace. Nowhere has the Security Council established a clearer framework than in its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
86.	The road towards a lasting peace stretches long and hard before us. The Middle East has seen more than its share of dashed hopes and disappointment. But the conclusion of the recent Sinai agreement1 marks a major step forward. It is the first agreement in the long and tragic history of the Arab-Israeli conflict which is not the immediate consequence of hostilities. It could mark a turning-point.
87.	The agreement deserves the support of all the countries assembled here because every nation here has an interest in progress towards peace in the Middle East. It is another step in the process launched by Security Council resolution 338 (1973). The alternative was a continuing stalemate which would have led over time to another war creating a serious threat to world peace and the prospect of global economic confrontations.
88.	Neither fear of the future nor pride should obscure the fact that an unusual opportunity for further progress on all issues now exists. But opportunities must be seized or they will disappear. I want to emphasize that the United States did not help negotiate this agreement in order to put an end to the process of peace, but to give it new impetus.
89.	President Ford has stated that we will not accept stalemate or stagnation in the Middle East. That was true before the Sinai agreement was signed; it remains true today. The objective of our policy is not merely to create another temporary truce but to sustain the momentum of negotiations. The United States is determined to take every feasible step to help promote further practical progress towards final peace.
90.	As a first step, it is essential that the Sinai agreement be carried out impeccably, within the terms and the time-frame that are stipulated.
91.	In the improved atmosphere thus created, the United States stands ready to participate in any promising initiative towards peace at the request of the parties concerned.
92.	We have made clear that we are prepared to make a serious effort to encourage negotiations between Syria and Israel.
93.	We also intend to consult over the coming weeks with all concerned regarding the reopening of the Geneva Conference which met at an early crucial phase. As co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference together with the Soviet Union, our two countries have special responsibilities in this regard.
94.	We are prepared also to explore possibilities for perhaps a more informal multilateral meeting to assess conditions and to discuss the future.
95.	The United States seeks no special benefit; we do not attempt to exclude any country. We will cooperate with any nation that is willing to make a contribution. We have no preference for any particular procedure. We will support whatever process seems most promising. Our approach will continue to be both flexible and determined.
96.	The search for final peace must be conducted on a wide basis. We are in frequent touch with Governments in the Middle East. We have begun discussions with the Soviet Union with a view to assessing the current situation and weighing possible diplomatic approaches to bring about a just and durable peace in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). While we have had important differences with the Soviet Union, our two countries have held parallel views that the situation in the Middle East poses grave dangers and that partial steps must be part of and contribute to progress towards a comprehensive settlement.
97.	The role of the world Organization remains essential. If this Organization had no other accomplishment than its effective peace-keeping role in this troubled area, it would have well justified itself. These soldiers of peace, wearing the blue beret of the United Nations, as members of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine, the United Nations Emergency Force, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force have become indispensable to the maintenance of the two 1974 disengagement accords as well as the Sinai agreement. I want to take this occasion to salute the Secretary- General, Mr. Waldheim, and his staff, and General Siilasvuo, the Chief Coordinator of the United Nations peace-keeping missions in the Middle East, and all the men and women from many countries who have served in these forces which have no enemy.
98.	The deliberations of this Assembly regarding the Middle East also play a central role. They can encourage progress or exacerbate tensions. Procedural decisions can be based on the recognition that dialog requires universality of membership, or they can fuel a futile, self-defeating effort to discriminate in violation of the Charter against a Member State whose participation is vital for a solution.
99.	The Middle East will continue to be an area of anguish, turmoil, and peril until a just and durable peace is achieved. Such a peace must meet the principal concerns and interests of all in the area; among and security and the legitimate interests of the Palestinians.
100.	In the Middle East today here is a yearning for peace surpassing any known for three decades. Let us not doom the region to another generation of futile struggle. Instead, let the world community seize the historic opportunity before it. The suffering of all the peoples of the Middle East cry out for it; the hopes and interests of all the world's peoples demand it. The United States promises its full dedication to further progress towards peace.
101.	The contribution of the United Nations to the process of peace is essential in Cyprus as well. The Secretary-General has the responsibilities of organizing the peace-keeping forces on the island and of facilitating the talks between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish communities.
102.	Strict maintenance of the cease-fire is imperative. For this we look to the restraint of the parties and the efficacy of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
103.	We know that the world community shares our sense of urgency that the negotiating process be resumed and that the parties demonstrate flexibility and statesmanship. The status quo on the island must not become permanent; a rapid and equitable solution is essential. The Secretary-General has worked tirelessly and imaginatively under the most difficult circumstances to narrow the differences. He deserves the full support of the parties and of every nation here.
104.	The details of a Cyprus settlement are for the two communities themselves to decide. However, in keeping with United Nations resolutions which the United States has fully supported, the following principles are believed by my Government to be essential:
(a)	A settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It must ensure that both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs.
(b)	The present dividing lines cannot be permanent. There must be movement from these lines to agreed territorial arrangements which reflect the economic requirements of the Greek Cypriot community and take account of its self-respect.
(t ) There must be provision for the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under the authority of international agreements.
(id) There must be security for all Cypriots; the needs and wishes of the refugees who have been the principal victims and whose tragic plight touches us all must be dealt with speedily and with compassion.
105.	Another area where this Organization will be called upon to take responsible actions is the Korean peninsula. This requires, above all, maintenance of the armistice, pending agreement by all of the parties most directly concerned to replace it with a new arrangement. The existing Armistice Agreement is the only legal instrument committing the parties to maintain the peace. It is a carefully designed structure for monitoring and policing the military demarcation line.
106.	The United Nations Commander-in-Chief is a signatory to that Agreement. The armistice machinery functions daily. None of the signatories has repudiated it. Nor could they do so without serious risks to the peace of the world.
107.	Since 1972, South and North Korea have pledged themselves to enter into a dialog and to seek unification without resort to arms. This Assembly in 1973 and 1974 encouraged this process first in a consensus supporting talks between the two sides, then in a resolution [resolution 3333 (XXIX)] which looked towards termination of the United Nations Command. The United States agrees that 20 years after the end of the Korean war it is timely to terminate the United Nations Command. We have, in fact, sponsored a draft resolution to that effect which is now before you.
108.	It would be foolhardy, however, to terminate the United Nations Command without new arrangements to preserve the integrity of the Armistice Agreement. In the interest of peace, the United States cannot accept any solution which fails to provide for the continuing validity of the Armistice Agreement.
109.	The Republic of Korea and the United States have stated their general readiness to meet with representatives of the other side and with other members of the Security Council to discuss the termination of the United Nations Command while preserving the Armistice Agreement.
110.	Today I can be more specific. The United States and the Republic of Korea, looking forward to the time when a lasting solution of the Korean problem can be achieved, are herewith proposing to the parties to the Armistice Agreement the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve it. At such a meeting we would also be prepared to explore other measures to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula, including the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement.
111.	It would be in keeping with this spirit of dialog for this body to open its doors to full membership for the two Korean Governments. The United States supports the dual entry of both South and North Korea into the United Nations without prejudice to their eventual reunification. For our part, if North Korea and its allies would move to improve their relations with the Republic of Korea we would be prepared to take similar reciprocal action. It goes without saying that no proposal for security arrangements on the Korean peninsula which attempts to exclude the Republic of Korea from the discussions can be accepted by the United States.
112.	The United Nations can contribute significantly to the process of peace on the Korean peninsula by supporting a responsible approach.
113.	Over the past year the United States has followed carefully and with great sympathy the efforts to reach peaceful settlements in southern Africa.
114.	We welcome the statesmanlike efforts of both black and white African leader: who are seeking to prevent violence and bloodshed and to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. The differences between the two communities in that country, while substantial, have been narrowed in the last decade. Both sides in Rhodesia, and Rhodesia's neighbors,
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
war. The United States will support all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement.
115.	In underlining our goal of peaceful change for southern Africa, I want to emphasize the importance of an early settlement in Namibia. My Government's opposition to South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia and our rejection of South Africa's apartheid system are well known. The United States has consistently conveyed our position on this subject to South Africa. We will continue to do so.
116.	We believe that the people of Namibia should be given the opportunity, within a short time, to express their views on the political future and constitutional structure of their country, freely and under United Nations supervision.
117.	Peace in the world will be fragile and tenuous without a curb and, eventually, an end to the arms race. This is why the United States has embarked, with the Soviet Union, upon the difficult and complex negotiation to limit strategic arms. Our objectives are to prevent unchecked destabilizing competition in strategic armaments; to achieve reduction of these arms; to lessen further the likelihood of hasty decisions in times of crisis; and to ease the economic burden of the nuclear arms race.
118.	The Vladivostok accord of last autumn marked a major step towards achieving these goals. When this agreement in principle is translated into a treaty, agreed ceilings will be placed on strategic force levels for a 10-year period. This unprecedented step will slow the pace of new arms programs, especially those driven by fear of major deployments by the other side.
119.	The United States is actively engaged in other amis control negotiations. Together with the Soviet Union, we have made progress towards establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions, and we have agreed to set a threshold on the underground testing of nuclear weapons. These are significant steps towards a. verifiable comprehensive test ban.
120.	In addition, the United States and the Soviet Union have presented to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques [A/10027, annex II, documents CCDI47I and CCD/472]. Misuse of this knowledge might open new avenues of military competition and wreak untold and irreversible harm upon all humanity. We urge the Conference to complete its consideration rapidly.
121.	Another urgent task is a substantia] reduction in the high levels of military forces now confronting each other in various parts of the world. The United States believes that the time has come to give new impetus to the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. The significance of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe depends to an important extent on whether we can achieve progress in this area. An agreement that enhances mutual security in central Europe is feasible and essential. We will work towards that goal.
122.	The world faces a paradox with respect to the proliferation of nuclear energy. Men have fashioned from the atom weapons which can in minuter end the civilization of centuries. Simultaneously, the atom is fast becoming a more and more essential source of energy. It is clear that the cost and eventual scarcity of oil and other fossil fuels will increasingly spread nuclear power around the world in the decades ahead.
123.	But the spreading of nuclear power poses starkly the danger of proliferating nuclear weapons capabilities and the related risks of the theft of nuclear materials, blackmail by terrorists, accidents or the injection of the nuclear threat into regional political conflicts. Now is the time to act. If we fail to restrain nuclear proliferation, future generations will live on a planet shadowed by nuclear catastrophe.
124.	Over the past year the United States has repeatedly urged new efforts among the supplier States to strengthen and standardize safeguards and controls on the export of nuclear materials. We must not allow these safeguards to be eroded by commercial competition. We must ensure the broad availability of peaceful nuclear energy under safe, economical and reliable conditions.
125.	The United States has intensified its efforts within the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA ] and with other nations to broaden and strengthen international standards and safeguards, and has proposed an international convention setting standards to protect the physical security of nuclear materials in use, storage and transfer.
126.	The United States continues to urge the widest possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] and the associated safeguard measures of the IAEA.
127.	The greatest single danger of unrestrained nuclear proliferation resides in the spread, under national control, of reprocessing facilities for the atomic materials in nuclear power plants. The United States therefore proposes, as a major step to reinforce all other measures, the establishment of multinational regional nuclear fuel-cycle centers. These centers would serve energy needs on a commercially sound basis and encourage regional energy co-operation. Their existence would reduce the incentive for small and inefficient reprocessing facilities, limit the possibility of diverting peaceful nuclear materials to national military use, and create a better framework for applying effective international safeguards.
128.	We urge that groups of nations begin now to explore this concept and that all States support the work of the IAEA in this field.
129.	In the last two years the world community has been reminded dramatically to what extent economic relations are an essential foundation of the economic order. It would be one of history's most tragic ironies if, at a time when .. i are putting behind us the tensions of the cold war, we were to enter a new period of conflict between North and South, rich and poor. At the recently concluded seventh special session, the United States called for an end to the sterile confrontations of the past. We stated that, when the ancient dream of mankind, a world without poverty, becomes a possibility, our moral convictions also make it a duty. And we emphasized that only co-operation, not extortion, can achieve gives us ground for hope that, at least for the immediate future, a choice has been made to turn away from confrontation towards co-operation. The United States is proud to support the final document [resolution 3362 (S-VII)], which is the product of the arduous effort and dedication of so many in this chamber.
130.	The United States considers the achievements of the seventh special session a beginning, not an end. As recommended in the final report, we must now move forward in available forums to give reality and content to the objectives on which we have agreed. In the difficult negotiations ahead my Government will participate energetically, in a co-operative and conciliatory spirit.
131.	Beyond peace, security and prosperity lies a deeper universal aspiration to dignity and equal opportunity. Mankind will never be spared all the tragedies inherent in the cycle of life and death. But we do have it in our power to eliminate or to ease the burden of social tragedy and of organized injustice.
132.	The United States has traditionally been an advocate of extending the reach of international law in international affairs. We have offered our help to the victims of disease and natural disaster. There is no longer any dispute that international human rights are on the agenda of international diplomacy.
133.	The reach of international law must extend to the last frontiers of our planet, the oceans. They are the common heritage of mankind, but they can turn into arenas of conflict unless governed by law. They hold untapped sources of energy, minerals and proteins; their environmental integrity is crucial to our survival.
134.	The United States welcomes the United Nations mandate for a comprehensive treaty governing the use of the oceans and their resources. Last month at Montreal I set forth our approach to this negotiation and urged that next year's session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea move matters to a rapid and successful conclusion. No international negotiation is more vital for long-term political and economic stability and the prosperity of our globe.
135.	International law must also come to grips with international terrorism. Innumerable innocent lives have been lost as a consequence of the lack of internationally accepted standards specifically designed to avert unlawful and dangerous interference with civil aviation. The hijacking of aircraft, the kidnapping and murder of innocent civilian victims for presumed political gain remain a plague on civilized man. This remains one of the under-developed areas of international law which merits the most urgent attention of this Organization.
136.	Compassion for our fellow men requires also that we mobilize international resources to combat the age-old scourges of mankind: disease, famine and natural disaster.
137.	The great human rights must be recognized, respected and given reality in the affairs of nations. The earliest United Nations declarations and the recent Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe leave no doubt that these are matters of international concern. The United States will support these principles. Throughout the world, in all continents, violations of human rights must be opposed whether they are inflicted by one race upon another or upon members of the same race. Human rights must be cherished regardless of race, sex or religion. There can be no double standard.
138.	The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has taken its first steps against gross violations of human rights where serious and reliable allegations are submitted by individuals. We support those steps. The organized concern of the world community can be a potent weapon in the war against degradation of human values.
139.	One of the most persistent and serious problems is torture, a practice which all nations should abhor. It is an absolute debasement of the function of government with  its overwhelming power is used not for people's welfare but as an instrument of their suffering.
140.	The United States urges this Assembly to adopt the draft Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommended for adoption by the Assembly by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva recently.4 In addition, we propose that this General Assembly establish a group of experts, to be appointed by the Secretary-General, to study the nature and extent of torture in the world today and to report back to the next session of our Assembly.
141.	This Organization was created in the belief that the universality of the human race can be reflected in the conduct of international affairs. This Chamber symbolizes the hope that mankind places in the force of nations working together in the common interest, with reason, responsibility and mutual respect.
142.	The problems we face are complex and perilous. The sterile slogans of yesterday, the solutions of the past, the dwelling upon old resentments, can only widen the gaps between us and allow the dangers to peace and the well-being of our peoples to fester and to grow.
143.	We have it in our power to prove to future generations that the last quarter of the twentieth century was not an era of violence and conflict, but one of the creative epochs of world history.
144.	My country's history tells us that it is possible to fashion unity while cherishing diversity; that common action is possible despite the variety of races, interests and beliefs we see here in this Chamber. Progress and peace and justice are attainable.
145.	So we say to all peoples and all Governments: let us fashion together a new world order. Let its arrangements be just. Let the new nations help shape it and feel it is theirs. Let the old nations use their strengths and skills for the benefit of all mankind. Let us all work together to enrich the spirit and to ennoble mankind.
﻿Three years ago I had the honour
of being the first American President born after the
founding of the United Nations to address the General
Assembly. In its fifty-first year, the United Nations has not
yet realized all its founders’ aspirations. But the ideals of
the United Nations Charter — peace, freedom, tolerance
and prosperity — now touch more people in more nations
than ever before.
Now we find ourselves at a turning point in history
when the blocs and barriers that long defined the world are
giving way to an age of remarkable possibility — a time
when more of our children and more nations will be able to
live out their dreams than ever before. But this is also an
age of new threats — threats from terrorists, from rogue
States that support them, threats from ethnic, religious,
racial and tribal hatreds, threats from international
criminals and drug traffickers — all of whom will be
more dangerous if they gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.
The challenge before us, plainly, is twofold: to seize
the new opportunities for more people to enjoy peace and
freedom, security and prosperity and to move strongly
and swiftly against the dangers that change has produced.
This week and in this place, we take a giant step
forward. By overwhelming global consensus, we will
make a solemn commitment to end all nuclear tests for all
time.
Before entering this Hall, I had the great honour to
be the first leader to sign the Comprehensive Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). I did so, with some pride, with this pen,
for this pen is the very one that President Kennedy used
to help bring the limited test-ban Treaty to life 33 years
ago.
This Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
ability of other States to acquire such devices themselves.
It points us towards a century in which the roles and risks
of nuclear weapons can be further reduced and ultimately
eliminated.
I want to thank all those who helped bring us to this
day, especially the Chairman of the comprehensive test-


ban negotiating Committee, Netherlands Ambassador
Ramaker, and the Government of Australia, which took the
lead at the United Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for the remarks he made
this morning in establishing the criteria and standards in
support of the United Nations as the depository of the
Treaty.
The signatures of the world’s declared nuclear
Powers — the United States, China, France, Russia and the
United Kingdom — along with those of the vast majority
of its nations, will immediately create an international norm
against nuclear testing even before the Treaty formally
enters into force.
The CTBT is the shared work of hard negotiation.
Some have complained that it does not mandate total
nuclear disarmament by a date certain. I would say to them:
“Do not forsake the benefits of this achievement by
ignoring the tremendous progress we have already made
towards that goal.” Today there are no Russian missiles
pointed at America and no American missiles pointed at
Russia.
Through the START Treaties we are cutting our
nuclear arsenals by two thirds. Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan are giving up the nuclear weapons left on their
land after the Soviet Union dissolved.
We are working with the newly independent States to
improve security at nuclear facilities and to convert nuclear
weapons to peaceful uses.
The United States and other nuclear-weapon States
have embraced the South Pacific and African nuclear-free
zones. Now half the world’s land area is nuclear free by
international agreement. And the world community
extended indefinitely the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Yet some of the very changes that had made this
progress possible have also created new risks. The breakup
of the Soviet Union left nuclear materials dispersed
throughout the newly independent States. As barriers have
come down around the world the danger of nuclear
smuggling has gone up. So even as we reduce the global
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, we must also
reduce the danger that lethal materials could wind up in the
wrong hands, while developing effective defences for our
people if that should happen.
The United States has six priority goals to further lift
the threat of nuclear weapons destruction and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, and to limit their dangerous
spread.
First, we must protect our people from chemical
attack and make it harder for rogue States and terrorists
to brandish poison gas by bringing the chemical weapons
Convention into force as soon as possible. I thank the
nations here that have ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I deeply regret that the United States Senate
has not yet voted on the Convention, but I want to assure
you and people throughout the world that I will not let
this treaty die, and we will join the ranks of nation
determined to prevent the spread of chemical weapons.
Secondly, we must reduce the risk that an outlaw
State or organization could build a nuclear device by
negotiating a treaty to freeze the production of fissile
materials for use in nuclear weapons. The Conference on
Disarmament should take up this challenge immediately.
The United States, Russia, France and the United
Kingdom already have halted production of fissile
materials for weapons. I urge other nations to end the
unsafeguarded production of these materials pending
completion of the treaty.
Thirdly, we must continue to reduce our nuclear
arsenals. When Russia ratifies START II, President
Yeltsin and I are all ready to discuss the possibilities of
further cuts, as well as limiting and monitoring nuclear
warheads and materials. This will help make deep
reductions irreversible.
Fourthly, we must reinforce our efforts against the
spread of nuclear weapons by strengthening the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
should give the International Atomic Energy Agency a
stronger role and sharper tools for conducting worldwide
inspections. Our law enforcement and customs officials
should cooperate more in the fight against nuclear
smuggling. And I urge all nations that have not signed the
NPT to do so without delay.
Fifthly, we must better protect our people from those
who would use disease as a weapon of war, by giving the
biological weapons Convention the means to strengthen
compliance, including on-site investigations when we
believe such weapons may have been used or when
suspicious outbreaks of disease occur. We should aim to
complete this task by 1998.
2

Finally, we must end the carnage caused by
anti-personnel landmines, the hidden killers that murder and
maim more than 25,000 people a year. In May, I announced
a series of actions the United States would take towards
this goal. Today, I renew my appeal for the swift
negotiation of a worldwide ban on the use, stockpiling,
production, and transfer of anti-personnel landmines. Our
children deserve to walk the Earth in safety.
Thirty-three years ago, at the height of the cold war,
President Kennedy spoke at American University in
Washington. Peace was the topic of his address, but not an
abstract ideal of peace. Instead, he urged us to focus on
“a more practical, attainable peace — based not on a
sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual
evolution in human institutions — on a series of
concrete actions and effective agreements which are in
the interests of all concerned.”
It was in that same speech that he announced that talks
would shortly begin in Moscow on a comprehensive test-
ban treaty.
President Kennedy’s vision exceeded the possibilities
of his time, but his words speak to us still. As we sign our
names to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty —
the longest-sought, hardest-fought prize in arms control
history — let us summon the confidence of earlier pioneers
and set our sights on the challenges of the new century.
Over the past three years we have moved in the right
direction in meeting those challenges. In Bosnia, where the
war is over and where just 10 days ago its people went to
the polls in peace, we have moved in the right direction.
Now we must help Bosnia build a unified, democratic, and
peaceful future.
In Haiti, where the dictators are gone, democracy is
back and the exodus of refugees has ended, we have move
in the right direction. Now we must help the Haitian people
seize the full benefits of freedom and forge a more
prosperous future. In the Middle East and in Northern
Ireland, there is progress towards lasting peace, and we are
moving in the right direction. Now we must support
continued progress between Israel and Palestinians, and we
must broaden the circle of peace to include more of Israel’s
neighbours. We must help to give the children of Belfast
the chance to live out normal lives.
In the fact that democracy, open markets and peace
are taking hold around the world, we are moving in the
right direction. Here in the Americas, every nation but
one has raised freedom’s flag. In Central Europe, in
Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent States, the
forces of reform have earned all our respect and will
continue to have the support of the United States. Now
we must begin to welcome Europe’s new democracies
into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
strengthen NATO’s partnership with Russia and build a
secure and undivided Europe.
In Asia, South Korea, Japan, China and America
working together persuaded North Korea to freeze its
nuclear programme under international monitoring. Now,
in the wake of provocative actions by North Korea, we
must pursue a permanent peace for all the Korean people.
Our planet is safer because of our common efforts to
close Chernobyl, to address the challenges of climate
change, to protect the world’s forests and oceans. Now
we must uphold our duty as custodians of our
environment so that our children will inherit an even
healthier planet.
All of us must continue our historic efforts to build
a better, more global trading system for the twenty-first
century. We have made remarkable progress, but there is
more to do in opening markets, in creating millions of
new jobs for all our people.
In this time of challenge and change, the United
Nations is more important than ever before, because our
world is more interdependent than ever before. Most
Americans know this. Unfortunately, some Americans, in
their longing to be free of the world’s problems, and
perhaps to focus more on our own problems, ignore what
the United Nations has done, ignore the benefits of
cooperation. They ignore our own interdependence with
all of you in charting a better future. They ignore all that
the United Nations is doing to lift the lives of millions by
preserving the peace, vaccinating children, caring for
refugees, sharing the blessings of progress around the
world. They have made it difficult for the United States
to meet its obligations to the United Nations. But let me
reassure all of you: the vast majority of Americans
support the United Nations, not only because it reflects
our own ideals, but because it reinforces our interests. We
must continue to work to manifest the support that our
people feel. For the fifty-first year in a row, the United
States will be the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations. We are paying our dues, and I am
committed to paying off our accumulated obligations.
However, we also support the process of reform, which
has done great work in reforming and streamlining the
3


bureaucracy and reining in the budget, and it should
continue.
We also believe that all of us — the nations of the
world working together — must do more to fight terrorism.
Last year I asked the nations assembled here to commit to
a goal of zero tolerance for aggression, terrorism and
lawless behaviour. Frankly, we have not done that yet. Real
zero tolerance means giving no aid and no quarter to
terrorists who slaughter the innocent and drug traffickers
who poison our children, and doing everything we can to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Real zero tolerance requires us to isolate
States that refuse to play by the rules we have all accepted
for civilized behaviour. As long as Iraq threatens its
neighbours and its people, as long as Iran supports and
protects terrorists, as long as Libya refuses to give up the
people who blew up Pan Am 103, they should not become
full members of the family of nations.
The United States is pursuing a three-part strategy
against terrorists: abroad, by working more closely than
ever with like-minded nations; at home by giving our law
enforcement the toughest counter-terrorism tools available,
and by doing all we can to make our airports and the
aeroplanes that link us all together even safer. I have
requested more than $1 billion from our Congress to meet
these commitments, and we are implementing the United
States Vice President's aviation security plan to make those
travelling to, from and within the United States more
secure.
There are other steps we must take together. Last year,
I urged that together we crack down on money laundering
and front companies, shut down gray markets for guns,
explosives and false documents, open more law
enforcement centres around the world and strengthen
safeguards on lethal materials. In each of these areas we
have made progress, through the United Nations, at the
Summit of Peacemakers in Sharm el-Sheikh, at the Paris
terrorism conference and individually.
Now we should adopt the declaration on crime and
public security I proposed last year. It includes a no-
sanctuary pledge, so that we can say with one voice to the
terrorists, criminals and drug traffickers: “You have no
place to run, no place to hide.” I call on every Member to
ratify 11 international conventions that would help prevent
and punish terrorism and to criminalize the use of
explosives in terrorist attacks.
To every nation whose children fall prey to
drugs and every nation that makes those drugs: we must
do more to reduce demand and to take illegal drugs off
the market and off the streets. The United States will do
its part. Next week, I will target more than $100-million
worth of defence equipment, services and training to
Mexico, Colombia and other South American and
Caribbean countries.
These resources will help our friends stop the flow
of drugs at the source. Now I ask every nation that
exports the chemicals needed to make illicit drugs to
create an informal group whose members will work to
deny these chemicals to drug producers. We must not let
more drugs darken the dawn of the next century.
Our duty to fight all these forces of destruction is
directly linked to our efforts to reduce the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We all know we are not
immune from this. We saw it when our friends in Japan
were subject to the murderous power of a small vial of
sarin gas unleashed in the Tokyo subway. We know a
small lump of plutonium is enough to build a nuclear
bomb. We know that more dangerous people have access
to materials of mass destruction because of the rapid
movement and open borders of this age. The quest to
eliminate these problems from the world’s arsenals and to
stop them from spreading has taken on a new and
powerful urgency for all of us.
So let us strengthen our determination to fight the
rogue States, the terrorists and the criminals who menace
our safety, our way of life and the potential of our
children in the twenty-first century. Let us recommit
ourselves to prevent them from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Let us work harder than ever to lift the
nuclear backdrop that has darkened the world’s stage for
too long now. Let us make these solemn tasks our
common obligation, our common commitment; if we do,
then together we will enter the twenty-first century
marching towards a better, safer world — the very better,
safer world the United Nations has sought to build for 51
years.




﻿I am happy to join other
speakers in warmly congratulating His Excellency Mr.
Razali Ismail on his assumption of the presidency of the
General Assembly. I also wish to express Canada’s deep
appreciation of the excellent manner in which Mr. Freitas
do Amaral managed the deliberations of the fiftieth
session of the Assembly.
Forty years ago, in the depths of the cold war, the
General Assembly authorized the setting up of a
peacekeeping force in Suez. Thus emerged an important
tool for the international community, one that has since
served the cause of peace in many different forms around
the world.
(spoke in French)
Canadians take special pride in peacekeeping
because the concept was developed in part by their
Foreign Minister, Lester B. Pearson, who received the
Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.
As we reflect on the fortieth anniversary of United
Nations peacekeeping, there are certain conclusions to be
drawn. The United Nations has played a crucial role
throughout the world by dint of its peacekeeping role.
Innovation is both necessary and possible within the
United Nations, and in our time, different as it may be,
the spirit of internationalism, of commitment to
cooperation, calls to us once again.
(spoke in English)
In a new and changing global environment
internationalism is ever more important for all nations,
large or small, weak or powerful. Changing times have
set for us a new broad agenda, which includes focusing
on the security needs of individuals — in other words, on
sustainable human security. Unfortunately, the new times
have not sufficiently been reflected by a rededication to
the United Nations as an expression of the spirit of
internationalism. There remains too often a tendency to
act according to old power configurations rather than to
seek out collective approaches that address the roots of
conflict and attempt to resolve them through common
action.
12


The need for recommitment to the United Nations is
clear, and so too is the need for the renewal, restructuring
and refocusing of the Organization and its various bodies
and agencies. In implementing this agenda of United
Nations renewal we will no doubt encounter difficulties and
differences of opinion. But this should not discourage us.
We need the courage to innovate on two fronts, grappling
with a new and complex world agenda and restructuring the
United Nations to respond effectively to that agenda.
The basic mandate of the United Nations at its
founding was the prevention of international conflict. As
peacekeeping has changed over time, one can see the
evolution of a security agenda itself, from being a simple
buffer between States to an international responsibility for
maintaining order and an involvement in reconstruction.
The range of activities in recent times has been impressive,
from Haiti to Cambodia, from the Golan Heights to El
Salvador, from Bosnia to the peace accords now being
signed in Guatemala.
That range demonstrates that the international response
to threats to security has gone well beyond the initial
definition, which was limited to dealing with cross-border
aggression. Rather, in a continuum of threats, there is an
increasing focus on conflicts that take place within borders
but that have severe ripple effects throughout the entire
international system. These types of conflict are still, in
peacekeeping terms, largely uncharted waters, and of course
there are differences of view on how best to respond.
What is clear is the need for a new tool kit for the
United Nations to respond to a variety of different
situations. In this context I am glad to note that most of the
recommendations made in the rapid-reaction study
submitted by Canada last year are now being implemented.
Canada will continue to support United Nations efforts to
establish a headquarters that will enhance its ability to
respond rapidly and with flexibility. But that is only one
tool. Many more are needed, especially in the area of
prevention of disputes and in the arduous and complex task
of peace-building.
The failure of conflict prevention in Rwanda, as
outlined in the Rwanda evaluation report, has made
abundantly clear the need to enlarge the concept of peace-
building to embrace prevention as well as peacemaking and
reconstruction. Preventive action will require much greater
commitment from United Nations Members to intervene
early.
In Canada, we are currently focusing our approach
to these issues. We have started reworking our own
international tool kit to improve our ability to initiate and
support peace-building operations in areas such as
mediation, dialogue, human-rights monitoring, judicial
reform, police training and demobilization of military
forces. We look forward to cooperating with other nations
that are also exploring similar innovative approaches.
The search for new tools and the means to utilize
them collectively cannot, however, be a substitute for the
reinforcement of existing mechanisms to build peace. We
are about to take a historic step forward on the nuclear-
disarmament agenda. Today, the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty was opened for signature. That Treaty is
the result of decades of hope and effort by people around
the world. This morning I signed the Treaty on behalf of
Canada. We call upon all States Members of the United
Nations to do the same.
The children of tomorrow should, we hope, never
have to know what a nuclear test is. If we can succeed in
this goal, and if we can vigorously pursue the goal of
systematically and progressively reducing nuclear
weapons, with the ultimate goal of their elimination, we
can ensure that those children know less and less about
the most terrible scourge to face humanity.
If the world can focus its energies on ending the
testing of sophisticated and expensive nuclear weapons,
we believe that there is real hope for setting ourselves the
goal of ending the use of the most simple, cheap and, on
a daily basis, most destructive weapon in use today, the
anti-personnel landmine.
We have all witnessed the suffering, death and
horrifying mutilation caused by mines. Canada, along
with many other countries and organizations, is engaged
in mine-clearance operations. But the simple fact is that
anti-personnel mines are being laid far faster then we can
pull them out of the ground. This is not just a
disarmament issue. It strikes at the very heart of
development, and the thousands upon thousands of
victims affected every year pose a stark challenge to
humanitarian and peacekeeping efforts.
Canada will host an international strategy session
this autumn, bringing together like-minded Governments,
international agencies and non-governmental groups to
provide impetus and direction to international efforts
towards a global ban on anti-personnel mines. I hope this
will help to catalyse efforts to build a consensus on a
13


strong, forward-looking resolution for this fifty-first session.
As such, it can provide further impetus to multilateral
negotiations on a full global ban.
A third milestone in this area is the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the first international treaty that aims
to introduce a complete, global ban on an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction. It is of the greatest
importance that it be brought into force as soon as possible.
(spoke in French)
During the cold war, we re-examined and redefined
the dimensions of international security to embrace the
concept of sustainable human security. The rule of law and
good governance are as important to maintaining global
peace as disarmament measures. We are also coming to
realize that real security cannot be guaranteed by the State
alone, but must involve civil society as well.
(spoke in English)
These realizations stemmed in part from a growing
sense of insecurity at the newly emerging but deadly threats
of what one writer has described as “the underside of
globalization”, including environmental degradation, crime
and terrorism, and a lack of equity between the peoples of
the Earth.
The recent series of United Nations conferences has
served both to define the concept of sustainable human
security and to bring home the growing challenges to the
security of the individual. The road map is clear; we do not
need to study it any further. Now is the time to move
forward in a concerted, comprehensive way.
There are already notable examples of what the United
Nations system has achieved, such as programmes to
improve children’s health and strategies to combat such
environmental threats as depletion of the ozone layer.
But as important as these advances are, there remain
far too many paper commitments instead of real progress
on the ground. Currently we are swamped by a plethora of
agendas, blueprints and plans that run the risk of exhausting
the ability of donor nations to respond to or have a real
impact on those most in need. Too many bodies are
established to implement these plans, creating jurisdictional
confusion and an overlap in implementation. We need to
recognize that in the realm of sustainable human security,
Governments are not alone. The groups and networks that
have emerged around the world representing women,
indigenous peoples and children, along with business and
finance, are now major players, and we need a system of
governance that recognizes this and brings them into
partnership with Governments themselves.
One example of a new system is the Arctic Council,
which was inaugurated in Ottawa last week. This
multilateral regional body brings together Arctic nations
and indigenous groups to cooperate in the sustainable
development and environmental protection of a unique
and precious part of the globe. The Council represents a
new model of international organization, bringing together
people and States to share their energy and resources in
a common cause.
The upcoming World Food Summit organized by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) provides another opportunity to combine
governmental and non-governmental efforts. As a major
agricultural producer, Canada looks forward to working
with other nations and with non-governmental
organizations and representatives on solutions to the
problem of food security through approaches to
technology transfer, financing and land reform.
As private trade and investment flows into
developing countries increasingly outweigh the
significance of official development assistance, issues
such as terms of trade and debt take on even greater
significance. At the same time, new and complex issues
are emerging which existing international structures are
not well placed to address.
One major emerging issue is the relationship
between trade and labour standards. We are pleased to see
the International Labour Organization (ILO) focus on core
labour standards, including by working towards an
international convention on the elimination of forced child
labour. There can be no clearer example of an issue
where cooperation and dialogue with other international
and regional organizations, particularly between the ILO
and the World Trade Organization (WTO) and with non-
governmental groups is required in order to produce
synergy rather than overlap.
Sustainable human security means providing for
basic needs not just in economic ways, but in political
ways as well. Recent conflicts have demonstrated by
negative example that respect for human rights and
14


democratic principles is fundamental to the prevention of
conflict.
Last year, Canada commissioned work on the human
rights components of the United Nations field operations.
I am pleased to announce today that we will immediately
begin compiling a roster of qualified Canadian human rights
experts available for rapid deployment as part of larger
peace-building operations. We look forward to coordinating
our efforts with those of Norway and others to ensure
coherent, focused support for such United Nations efforts.
In 1998 we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This will be an
occasion not only to reaffirm our commitment to its
principles, but also to consider further practical steps to
implement them. One step we will take is to promote, as
part of the fiftieth anniversary, the preparations led by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, international
dialogue on means to combat hate propaganda, which is so
often the trigger of human tragedies such as genocide and
“ethnic cleansing”.
The establishment of international war-crimes
Tribunals in The Hague for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda represents a critical element of necessary progress
in the field of human rights. They signal our determination
to hold accountable all individuals guilty of committing
atrocities, be they officials of the State or extra- or para-
State actors. Above all, they signal our determination to
break the cycle of hatred. It is for these reasons that Canada
strongly urges the prompt establishment of a permanent
international criminal court as a new instrument in the fight
against massive human rights violations.
There is one aspect of human rights that my
Government and I have personally decided to make an
utmost priority: the rights of children. Let me take this
opportunity to thank the Swedish Government and
commend the organizers of last month’s World Congress on
the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children. It is
Canada’s fervent hope that this Congress will lead to the
implementation of the most effective practical measures, as
well as to the adoption and ratification of legally binding
international instruments to combat child slavery and the
commercial sexual exploitation of children. We should
move resolutely to conclude negotiation of the Draft
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography.
We will work through our own development funds
with all countries interested in similar goals.
The concept of sustainable democracy requires,
beyond a commitment to respect for basic human rights,
also a commitment to democratic development. In the last
decade we have seen the United Nations involved in the
promotion of democracy from Cambodia to South Africa
to Haiti. Other multilateral organizations are also playing
an important role, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the recent elections
in Bosnia. Recent conflicts have demonstrated the
importance of stable democratic structures in promoting
sustainable human security. They have also highlighted
the need to distinguish between legitimate aspirations and
dangerous tendencies towards fragmentation. Attempts to
structure political participation around culturally or
ethnically “pure” mini-States must be resisted by the
international community.
(spoke in French)
Haiti has been a critical test for the United Nations.
The promotion of democratization has been an integral
part of security. Concerted international effort is needed
to support democracy, not merely for the sake of one
leader or one election, but as part of the ongoing process
of laying the foundations of democratic institutions. We
must recognize this and must make the commitments
needed to ensure that the United Nations can work
effectively for peace and stability in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Nigeria, Burundi and Burma are among the most
recent challenges to our collective ability to support
democratic aspirations. Canada remains firmly committed
to the restoration of democracy in these countries, and to
working in these countries and with our partners,
bilaterally, multilaterally and within the Commonwealth
and francophonie to this end.
The explosion of information technologies presents
great dangers but also great opportunities for human
security. Extremist groups can spread their message of
hate and intolerance more easily, and we have only to
look to Bosnia and Rwanda to see the tragic effects this
can have. Yet at the same time, these technologies have
placed powerful tools for the strengthening of civil
society in the hands of millions of individual citizens and
groups.
15


The development of information technologies raises
many other questions, including issues of access and of
countering abuses such as the transmission of child
pornography or terrorism. The Economic and Social
Council has mandated a study of these issues. In Canada
we believe we have solid knowledge and expertise in these
area in terms of technology and jurisprudence and we will
make major contributions to finding solutions.
I have outlined some of the major issues that require
conceptual innovation on the part of the United Nations.
The counterpart to conceptual innovation is innovation in
renewing existing United Nations structures and developing
new ones. We should not hesitate to eliminate those
programmes or bodies that no longer serve any useful
purpose, to reorient those whose mission so requires, and
to consolidate and eliminate duplication. Nor should we
hesitate to create new instruments, within existing
resources, to deal with the challenge of the day. Reform is
more than just cost-cutting, though that aspect must not be
ignored.
Our first priority is the ongoing financial crisis the
United Nations faces. We have seen some encouraging
progress in the establishment and early results of the
Efficiency Board.
Perhaps more importantly, there is a growing
awareness of the need for financial and administrative
restructuring. But much remains to be done. I cannot
simply content myself here with calling yet again for all
Members to pay their dues unconditionally — in full and
on time. I have to ask why it is that over half the Member
States are failing to meet this standard, and some are failing
to pay at all. Pressures on government budgets is no
excuse; Canada has in recent years undertaken some of the
most severe expenditure cuts of any developed country. Yet
we have maintained our commitment to pay our dues in full
and on time, because we believe that the United Nations
responds to key international priorities.
Perhaps some Members are withholding dues as a
form of blackmail, hoping to pressure the United Nations
into reforms through fiscal starvation. This is both wrong-
headed and short-sighted. An organization in crisis will not
have the energy required to tackle genuine reform. What is
needed here is political will, both in paying dues and in
moving forward in the difficult task of reviewing the scale
of assessments to better reflect the ability to pay. Canada
hopes that others will join us in demonstrating that will
during the current session of the Assembly.
Another priority is to strengthen the effectiveness of
the Security Council by giving it greater accountability,
representativeness, transparency and responsibility.
Canada attaches particular importance to the need to
ensure meaningful participation in decision-making by
those Members whose nationals — military or civilian —
are in the crossfire of the conflicts that the Council is
debating.
The Council needs to address two issues: its role and
its composition. On the former, if the Council is to come
to terms with the more complex nature of international
peace and security, it must be prepared to assume a
greater role in conflict prevention. This will require
cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and other Governments and non-governmental
actors in identifying and addressing emergency crises.
On the latter issue, the Council can address
criticisms of it as a closed body whose membership does
not fully reflect changes in the world since 1945 by
increasing the number of seats. The distribution of those
seats should take into account in the first instance the
contribution of Members to the broader purposes of the
United Nations Charter, and also the need for equitable
geographic representation. Membership has its privileges,
but more importantly, it must bring with it a special
responsibility and commitment to the principles of the
United Nations Charter and to sustainable human security.
(spoke in French)
Equally important is the revitalization of the General
Assembly. The United Nations General Assembly is the
one body that brings together all nations of the world in
their full diversity. It represents on a global scale both the
essence and the challenge of democracy. The General
Assembly must achieve consensus and take decisions on
the new human security agenda. It must promote
sustainable human security, a concept that combines the
need to husband natural resources, to generate growth and
to ensure peace and security.
(spoke in English)
I have outlined today some of the steps that Canada
has taken to advance thinking, to improve existing
practices and to develop new ones. And I know that other
Member States have been working towards the very same
end. We now have many options to consider and discuss.
16


But plans, proposals and studies are not enough. As
the poet Yeats said, “In dreams begins responsibility.” It is
easy to dream; it is much harder to act. We have a renewed
vision of multilateralism, and a renewed mandate not just
for the prevention of conflict, but for the nurturing of
peace. We have started work on making that vision a
reality. We all recognize how daunting this task is as we
embark upon it; but we must persist, for the task is as vital
as it is difficult.
We in 1996 must show ourselves capable of restoring
the spirit of 1956 when, in the deepest freeze of the cold-
war climate, the United Nations gave birth to peacekeeping
and changed international relations forever. We need to find
within ourselves the ability and the will to innovate and the
persistence to implement our innovations. It is in the
interest of each one of us, as much as it is in the interests
of all of us, to do so.








﻿I would like to begin today by
telling the Assembly about an American named Chris
Stevens. Chris was born in a town called Grass Valley,
California, the son of a lawyer and a musician. As a
young man, Chris joined the Peace Corps and taught English in Morocco, and he came to love and respect
the people of North Africa and the Middle East. He
would carry that commitment throughout his life.
As a diplomat, he worked from Egypt to Syria, from
Saudi Arabia to Libya. He was known for walking the
streets of the cities where he worked, tasting the local
food, meeting as many people as he could, speaking
Arabic, listening with a broad smile. Chris went to
Benghazi, arriving on a cargo ship, in the early days
of the Libyan revolution. As America’s representative,
he helped the Libyan people as they coped with violent
conflict, cared for the wounded and crafted a vision
for the future in which the rights of all Libyans would
be respected. After the revolution, he supported the
birth of a new democracy as Libyans held elections and
built new institutions and began to move forward after
decades of dictatorship.
Chris Stevens loved his work. He took pride in the
country he served, and he saw dignity in the people that
he met.
Two weeks ago, he travelled to Benghazi to review
plans to establish a new cultural center and modernize
a hospital. That is when America’s compound came
under attack. Along with three of his colleagues, Chris
was killed in the city that he had helped to save. He was
52 years old.
I tell this story because Chris Stevens embodied
the best of America. Like his fellow Foreign Service
officers, he built bridges across oceans and cultures and
was deeply invested in the international cooperation
that the United Nations represents. He acted with
humility, but he also stood up for a set of principles, a
belief that individuals should be free to determine their
own destiny and live with liberty, dignity, justice and
opportunity.
The attacks on the American civilians in Benghazi
were attacks on America. We are grateful for the
assistance we received from the Libyan Government
and from the Libyan people. There should be no doubt
that we will be relentless in tracking down the killers
and bringing them to justice. I also appreciate that,
in recent days, the leaders of other countries in the
region — including Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen — have
taken steps to secure our diplomatic facilities and called
for calm. So have religious authorities around the globe.
But it should be understood that the attacks of the
last two weeks are not simply an assault on America.

They are also an assault on the very ideals upon which
the United Nations was founded — the notion that people
can resolve their differences peacefully; that diplomacy
can take the place of war, and that, in an interdependent
world, all of us have a stake in working towards greater
opportunity and security for our citizens.
If we are serious about upholding those ideals, it
will not be enough to put more guards in front of an
Embassy or to put out statements of regret and wait for
the outrage to pass. If we are serious about those ideals,
we must speak honestly about the deeper causes of the
crisis, because we face a choice between the forces that
would drive us apart and the hopes we hold in common.
Today, we must affirm that our future will be
determined by people like Chris Stevens, and not by
his killers. Today, we must declare that such violence
and intolerance has no place among our United Nations.
It has been less than two years since a vendor in
Tunisia set himself on fire to protest the oppressive
corruption in his country and sparked what became
known as the Arab Spring. Since then, the world has
been captivated by the transformation that has taken
place, and the United States has supported the forces
of change.
We were inspired by the Tunisian protests that
toppled a dictator, because we recognized our own
beliefs in the aspirations of the men and women who
took to the streets.
We supported change in Egypt, because our
support for democracy ultimately put us on the side of
the people.
We welcomed a transition of leadership in Yemen,
because the interests of the people were no longer being
served by a corrupt status quo.
We intervened in Libya alongside a broad coalition
and with the mandate of the United Nations Security
Council, because we had the ability to stop the
slaughter of innocents and because we believed that the
aspirations of the people were more powerful than a
tyrant.
And as we meet here, we again declare that the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad must come to an end, so
that the suffering of the Syrian people can stop and a
new dawn can begin.
We have taken those positions because we believe
that freedom and self-determination are not unique to one culture. Those values are not simply American
values or Western values — they are universal values.
And even as there will be huge challenges that come
with a transition to democracy, I am convinced that,
ultimately, Government of the people, by the people and
for the people is more likely to bring about the stability,
prosperity and individual opportunity that serve as the
basis for peace in our world.
So, let us remember that this is a season of progress.
For the first time in decades, Tunisians, Egyptians and
Libyans voted for new leaders in elections that were
credible, competitive and fair. That democratic spirit
has not been restricted to the Arab world. Over the past
year, we have seen peaceful transitions of power in
Malawi and Senegal and a new President in Somalia.
In Burma, a President has freed political prisoners and
opened a closed society, a courageous dissident has
been elected to Parliament, and people look forward to
further reform. Around the globe, people are making
their voices heard, insisting on their innate dignity and
the right to determine their future.
And yet the turmoil of recent weeks reminds us that
the path to democracy does not end with the casting
of a ballot. Nelson Mandela once said, “To be free is
not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way
that respects and enhances the freedom of others”. True
democracy demands that citizens cannot be thrown in
jail because of what they believe and that businesses
can be opened without paying a bribe. It depends on the
freedom of citizens to speak their minds and assemble
without fear and on the rule of law and due process,
which guarantee the rights of all people.
In other words, true democracy — real freedom — is
hard work. Those in power have to resist the temptation
to crack down on dissidents. In hard economic times,
countries may be tempted to rally the people around
perceived enemies at home and abroad, rather than
focusing on the painstaking work of reform.
Moreover, there will always be those who reject
human progress — dictators who cling to power, corrupt
interests that depend upon the status quo, and extremists
who fan the flames of hate and division. From Northern
Ireland to South Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
from the Balkans to the Pacific Rim, we have witnessed
convulsions that can accompany transitions to a new
political order. At times, the conflicts arise along the
fault lines of race or tribe, and often they arise from the difficulties of reconciling tradition and faith with
the diversity and interdependence of the modern world.
In every country, there are those who find different
religious beliefs threatening; in every culture, those
who love freedom for themselves must ask themselves
how much they are willing to tolerate freedom for
others. That is what we saw play out in the last two
weeks, as a crude and disgusting video sparked outrage
throughout the Muslim world. Now, I have made it
clear that the United States Government had nothing
to do with that video, and I believe its message must
be rejected by all who respect our common humanity.
It is an insult not only to Muslims, but to America as
well, for as the city outside these walls makes clear, we
are a country that has welcomed people of every race
and every faith. We are home to Muslims, who worship
across our country. We not only respect the freedom
of religion, we have laws that protect individuals from
being harmed because of how they look or what they
believe. We understand why people take offence at that
video, because millions of our citizens are among those
people.
I know there are some who ask why we do not just
ban such a video. And the answer is enshrined in our
laws; our Constitution protects the right to practice free
speech. Here in the United States, countless publications
provoke offence. Like me, the majority of Americans
are Christian, and yet we do not ban blasphemy against
our most sacred beliefs. As President of our country
and Commander-in-Chief of our military, I accept that
people are going to call me awful things every day, and
I will always defend their right to do so.
Americans have fought and died around the globe
to protect the right of all people to express their views,
even views that we profoundly disagree with. We do not
do so because we support hateful speech, but because
our founders understood that without such protections,
the capacity of individuals to express their own views
and practise their own faith may be threatened. We do
so because in a diverse society, efforts to restrict speech
can quickly become a tool to silence critics and oppress
minorities. We do so because, given the power of faith in
our lives and the passion that religious differences can
inflame, the strongest weapon against hateful speech
is not repression; it is more speech — the voices of
tolerance that rally against bigotry and blasphemy, and
lift up the values of understanding and mutual respect.

I know that not all countries in this body share
that particular understanding of the protection of free
speech. We recognize that. But in 2012, at a time
when anyone with a cell phone can spread offensive
views around the world with the click of a button, the
notion that we can control the f low of information is
obsolete. The question then is how do we respond? And
on this we must agree: there is no speech that justifies
mindless violence. There are no words that excuse the
killing of innocents. There is no video that justifies
an attack on an embassy. There is no slander that
provides an excuse for people to burn a restaurant in
Lebanon, or destroy a school in Tunis, or cause death
and destruction in Pakistan. In our modern world with
modern technologies, for us to respond in that way to
hateful speech empowers any individual who engages
in such speech to create chaos around the world. We
empower the worst of us if that is how we respond.
More broadly, the events of the past two weeks also
speak to the need for all of us to honestly address the
tensions between the West and the Arab world, which
is moving towards democracy. Now, let me be clear:
just as we cannot solve every problem in the world, the
United States has not and will not seek to dictate the
outcome of democratic transitions abroad. We do not
expect other nations to agree with us on every issue,
nor do we assume that the violence of the past weeks or
the hateful speech of some individuals represents the
views of the overwhelming majority of Muslims, any
more than the views of the people who produced that
video represent those of Americans.
However, I do believe that it is the obligation of all
leaders in all countries to speak out forcefully against
violence and extremism. It is time to marginalize those
who, even when not directly resorting to violence, use
hatred of America, or the West, or Israel, as the central
organizing principle of politics. For that only gives
cover, and sometimes provides an excuse, for those who
do resort to violence.
That brand of politics, one that pits East against
West, and South against North, Muslims against
Christians and Hindus and Jews, cannot deliver on the
promise of freedom. To young people, it offers only
false hope. Burning an American f lag does nothing to
provide a child with an education. Smashing apart a
restaurant does not fill an empty stomach. Attacking
an embassy will not create a single job. That brand of
politics only makes it harder to achieve what we must
do together, namely, to educate our children and create the opportunities that they deserve; protect human
rights and extend democracy’s promise.
It should be understood that America will never
retreat from the world. We will bring to justice those
who harm our citizens and our friends, and we will
stand with our allies. We are willing to partner with
countries around the world to deepen ties of trade
and investment, science and technology, energy and
development — all efforts that can spark economic
growth for all our peoples and stabilize democratic
change.
But such efforts depend on a spirit of mutual
interest and mutual respect. No Government or
company, no school or non-governmental organization
will be confident working in a country where its people
are endangered. For partnerships to be effective,
our citizens must be secure and our efforts must be
welcomed. A politics based only on anger — one based
on dividing the world between us and them — not
only sets back international cooperation, it ultimately
undermines those who tolerate it. All of us have an
interest in standing up to those forces.
Let us remember that Muslims have suffered the
most at the hands of extremism. On the same day that
our civilians were killed in Benghazi, a Turkish police
officer was murdered in Istanbul only days before his
wedding; more than 10 Yemenis were killed in a car
bomb in Sana’a; several Afghan children were mourned
by their parents just days after they were killed by
a suicide bomber in Kabul. The impulse towards
intolerance and violence may initially be focused on the
West, but over time it cannot be contained. The same
impulses towards extremism are used to justify war
between Sunni and Shia, between tribes and clans. It
leads not to strength and prosperity but to chaos. In less
than two years, we have seen largely peaceful protests
bring more change to Muslim-majority countries than
a decade of violence. And extremists understand this.
Because they have nothing to offer to improve the lives
of people, violence is their only way to stay relevant.
They do not build; they only destroy.
It is time to leave the call to violence and the politics
of division behind. On so many issues, we face a choice
between the promise of the future or the prisons of the
past. And we cannot afford to get it wrong. We must
seize this moment. And America stands ready to work
with all who are willing to embrace a better future.
The future must not belong to those who target Coptic Christians in Egypt; it must be claimed by those in
Tahrir Square who chanted, “Muslims, Christians, we
are one.” The future must not belong to those who bully
women; it must be shaped by girls who go to school,
and those who stand for a world where our daughters
can live their dreams just like our sons.
The future must not belong to those corrupt few
who steal a country’s resources; it must be won by the
students and entrepreneurs, the workers and business
owners who seek a broader prosperity for all people.
Those are the women and men that America stands
with; theirs is the vision we will support.
The future must not belong to those who slander
the Prophet of Islam. But to be credible, those who
condemn that slander must also condemn the hate we
see in the images of Jesus Christ that are desecrated,
or churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is
denied.
Let us condemn incitement against Sufi Muslims
and Shia pilgrims. It is time to heed the words of
Gandhi: “Intolerance is itself a form of violence and
an obstacle to the growth of a true democratic spirit”.
Together we must work towards a world where we are
strengthened by our differences, not defined by them.
That is what America embodies; that is the vision that
we will support.
Among Israelis and Palestinians, the future must
not belong to those who turn their backs on the prospect
of peace. Let us leave behind those who thrive on
conflict, those who reject the right of Israel to exist.
The road is hard, but the destination is clear: a secure,
Jewish State of Israel and an independent, prosperous
Palestine. Understanding that such a peace must come
through a just agreement between the parties, America
will walk alongside all who are prepared to make that
journey.
In Syria, the future must not belong to a dictator
who massacres his people. If there is a cause that cries
out for protest in the world today, peaceful protest, it
is a regime that tortures children and shoots rockets
at apartment buildings. We must remain engaged to
ensure that what began with citizens demanding their
rights does not end in a cycle of sectarian violence.
Together, we must stand with those Syrians who
believe in a different vision: a Syria that is united and
inclusive, where children do not need to fear their own
Government and all Syrians have a say in how they are governed, Sunnis and Alawites, Kurds and Christians.
That is what America stands for. That is the outcome
that we will work for, with sanctions and consequences
for those who persecute, and assistance and support
for those who work for this common good, because we
believe that the Syrians who embrace this vision will
have the strength and the legitimacy to lead.
In Iran, we see where the path of a violent and
unaccountable ideology leads. The Iranian people
have a remarkable and ancient history, and many
Iranians wish to enjoy peace and prosperity alongside
their neighbours. But just as it restricts the rights of
its own people, the Iranian Government continues to
prop up a dictator in Damascus and supports terrorist
groups abroad. Time and again, it has failed to take the
opportunity to demonstrate that its nuclear programme
is peaceful and to meet its obligations to the United
Nations.
So let me be clear. America wants to resolve this
issue through diplomacy, and we believe that there
is still time and space to do so. But that time is not
unlimited. We respect the right of nations to access
peaceful nuclear power, but one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to see that we harness that power for
peace. Make no mistake: a nuclear-armed Iran is not a
challenge that can be contained. It would threaten the
elimination of Israel, the security of Gulf nations and
the stability of the global economy. It risks triggering
a nuclear-arms race in the region and the unravelling
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is why a coalition of countries is holding
the Iranian Government accountable, and that is why
the United States will do what we must to prevent Iran
from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
We know from painful experience that the path
to security and prosperity does not lie outside the
boundaries of international law and respect for human
rights. That is why this institution was established, from
the rubble of conflict. That is why liberty triumphed
over tyranny in the cold war, and that is the lesson of
the last two decades as well.
History shows that peace and progress come to
those who make the right choices. Nations in every part
of the world have travelled this difficult path. Europe,
the bloodiest battlefield of the twentieth century, is
united, free and at peace. From Brazil to South Africa,
from Turkey to South Korea, from India to Indonesia,
people of different races, religions and traditions have lifted millions out of poverty, while respecting the
rights of their citizens and meeting their responsibilities
as nations.
It is because of the progress that I have witnessed
in my own lifetime, the progress that I have witnessed
after nearly four years as President, that I remain ever
hopeful about the world that we live in. The war in
Iraq is over. American troops have come home. We
have begun a transition in Afghanistan, and America
and our allies will end our war on schedule in 2014.
Al-Qaida has been weakened, and Osama bin Laden
is no more. Nations have come together to lock down
nuclear materials, and America and Russia are reducing
our arsenals. We have seen hard choices made, from
Naypyidaw to Cairo to Abidjan, to put more power in
the hands of citizens.
At a time of economic challenge, the world
has come together to broaden prosperity. Through
the Group of 20, we have partnered with emerging
countries to keep the world on the path of recovery.
America has pursued a development agenda that fuels
growth and breaks dependency, and has worked with
African leaders to help them feed their nations. New
partnerships have been forged to combat corruption and
promote government that is open and transparent, and
new commitments have been made through the Equal
Futures Partnership to ensure that women and girls can
fully participate in politics and pursue opportunity.
Later today, I will discuss our efforts to combat the
scourge of human trafficking.
All those things give me hope. But what gives
me the most hope is not the actions taken by us, not
the actions of leaders; it is the people that I have
seen — the American troops who have risked their lives
and sacrificed their limbs for strangers half a world
away, the students in Jakarta or Seoul who are eager
to use their knowledge to benefit mankind, the faces in
a square in Prague or a parliament in Ghana who see
democracy giving voice to their aspirations, the young
people in the favelas of Rio and the schools of Mumbai
whose eyes shine with promise. Those men, women,
and children of every race and every faith remind me
that for every angry mob that gets shown on television,
there are billions around the world who share similar
hopes and dreams. They tell us that there is a common
heartbeat to humanity.
So much attention in our world turns to what
divides us. That is what we see on the news. That is what consumes our political debates. But when you strip
it all away, people everywhere long for the freedom to
determine their destiny; the dignity that comes with
work; the comfort that comes with faith; and the justice
that exists when Governments serve their people and
not the other way around.
The United States of America will always stand up
for these aspirations, for our own people and for people
all across the world. That was our founding purpose.
That is what our history shows. That is what Chris
Stevens worked for throughout his life.
I promise you this: long after the killers are brought
to justice, Chris Stevens’s legacy will live on in the lives
that he touched, in the tens of thousands who marched
against violence through the streets of Benghazi; in the
Libyans who changed their Facebook photo to one of
Chris; in the signs that read simply, “Chris Stevens was
a friend to all Libyans”. They should give us hope. They
should remind us that so long as we work for it justice
will be done, that history is on our side and that a rising
tide of liberty will never be reversed.

﻿It is an
honour to address the opening of the sixty-seventh
regular session of the General Assembly.
First of all, allow me to begin with a moment of
silence in tribute to all the diplomats, from so many
countries, who have lost their lives in the service of
our common humanity and in the pursuit of deeper
understanding among countries.

With the opening of this session, the General
Assembly has passed an important milestone. Since the
first session was convened in Central Hall Westminster
in London in January 1946 until the calling to order of
this new session, precisely 66 years and eight months
have elapsed. The General Assembly is now two thirds
of a century old — two thirds of a century during which
the Assembly and the planet have been witness to both
great achievements and grave injustices and have seen
both human triumphs and human tragedies.
It has been two thirds of a century during which
the peoples of the world made powerful progress. We
have launched humans into orbit. We have mapped the
human genome and unlocked various mysteries of life
and science. We have pulled hundreds of millions of
people out of abject poverty. And yet it has also been
two thirds of a century during which we suffered deep
disappointment — the worst incidents of terrorism
in the world’s history, including the largest terror
attack ever, here in New York on 11 September 2001;
the failure to anticipate and prevent genocide in
Cambodia and Rwanda; and the stubborn persistence
of totalitarianism and despotism. Some developments
were predictable. Others no one foresaw, and nobody
could have scripted.
As we stand on the threshold of the next third of a
century, we are reminded of that old adage, “the only analogy. At one time, sailors would navigate by the
North Star. Winds and currents would shift, storms
would blow, ships might even veer off course, but the
North Star remained fixed — as a guide and as a goal.
In the same way, the only way for us to navigate the
seas of change is to follow fixed principles and chart a
course for immutable goals. In our opinion, those goals
are the well-being, prosperity, security and dignity of
humankind, objectives that are reflected in the purposes
inscribed in Article 1 of the United Nations Charter.
We owe it to those we serve — to the people of this
planet — to maintain consistent effort in that direction.
They will judge our success by how well we further
the ends of prosperity, security, and human dignity. One
measures results by measuring the results themselves,
not by weighing best efforts, not by counting good
intentions, and not by calculating inputs. I do not
propose, therefore, to dwell extensively on reform of
the United Nations. This Organization is not a goal; it
is merely the means to accomplish goals. However, the
United Nations must spend less time looking at itself,
and more time focused on the problems that demand its
attention. I make that observation in a constructive and
positive spirit.
Canada was an original signatory to the Charter,
and is today the seventh-largest contributor to the
budget of this important Organization. Our commitment
to the United Nations has been tested and is proven.
Our commitment to the United Nations is important.
Nevertheless, because of our commitment to this body,
we cannot and will not participate in endless, fruitless
inward-looking exercises.
Canada’s Permanent Mission to the United Nations
will henceforth devote primary attention to what the
United Nations is achieving, not to how the United
Nations arranges its affairs. The United Nations spends
too much time on itself. It must now look outward. The
preoccupation with procedure and process must yield
to substance and results. If the United Nations focuses
on the achievement of goals — such as prosperity,
security and human dignity — then reform will take
care of itself. As the international community sets its
sights on a post-2015 development framework, it should
not forget the work that remains to be done and the
commitments it has made.
The United Nations Commission on Information
and Accountability for Women’s and Children’s Health,
co-chaired by Canada’s Prime Minister, Stephen
Harper, and President Jakaya Kikwete of the United
Republic of Tanzania, is the type of initiative that
Canada would like to see more of in the future, and its
recommendations need to be integrated into a post-2015
framework.
The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
reflects our collective determination to achieve “better
standards of life” for all humankind. It sets as a goal
“the economic and social advancement of all peoples”.
That is no mean ambition. Those of us who recognize
a Creator accept the responsibility to use the Creator’s
gifts to improve the well-being of all. Openness and
engagement are vital to progress and prosperity. Since
before recorded history, societies have reached out to
their neighbours and beyond. As soon as human beings
invented transport, we invented trade, exchanging not
just the fruits of the Earth, but also goods, practices and
ideas. Informed by our successes and failures — that
is, having benefited from engagement and having paid
the price of isolation — humankind has learned several
lessons. We cannot develop understanding by building
walls between cultures. We cannot achieve prosperity
by erecting walls between economies. And we cannot
advance a people by putting walls between them and
the State.
It is no longer necessary for humankind to endlessly
debate how to make people better off. There is no
special alchemy required. Blessed with the benefit of
human experience, we know what produces prosperity:
free trade among open societies operating under
transparent, consistent and fair rules. As Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon recently wrote, “engaging in the
world is the best path to a better future”.
The fight for the economic and social advancement
of all peoples is manifested in the struggle for open
markets, open society and open-mindedness. It is a
struggle in which Canada is decidedly not neutral. We
recognize that the well-being of Canadians depends
both on openness at home and on openness to the world.
Canadians know, from experience, the connection
between trade and prosperity. After all, in order to
support the world’s tenth-largest economy with only
the world’s thirty-sixth-largest population, we must be
a trading nation. We are expanding trade at a rate of
unparalleled ambition, and consequently we are looking
for partners. But we fully recognize that sustained trade
requires stability and security.
The United Nations will also be judged by how
well it advances the security of humankind. The goal of
security is not separate from the objective of well-being. Security is, after all, a vital part of people’s well-being.
Once again, openness and engagement are important
means of achieving that goal. While there may at times
be tension in the means of execution, there exists no
fundamental conflict between national security and the
open society; both seek to protect the same values, the
same rights and the same freedoms.
It is not enough for a society to protect its own
security. Global security affects all of us as members
of the global community. Or, as Nelson Mandela
eloquently put it, “freedom would be meaningless
without security in the home and in the streets”. Thus,
our freedom is strengthened when others are free, and
our liberty is diminished so long as any of our brothers
or sisters are imprisoned by fear. Because a threat to
one is a threat to all, our security is enhanced when we
cooperate to protect fragile democracies or to block the
forces of instability.
The crisis in Syria is a test of this Organization’s
ability to achieve results. While the brutal and repressive
regime of Bashar Al-Assad continues the slaughter of
its own people, the United Nations continues to fail to
impose binding sanctions that would stem the crimson
tide of that bloody assault. Until the last moment of
recorded time, the world will remember and history will
judge Member States that are allowing the atrocities to
continue.
Many people of the planet, including many of the
citizens whom we represent, cannot understand why
this Organization — despite the sound and fury of
debate in this great Assembly — has been unable to
take concrete steps. Some ask, “What business is it
of ours?” Our citizens would argue that the business
is our common humanity, and our mandate is the
strengthening of humanity’s bonds. It is difficult
to fault their logic. The late Martin Luther King Jr.
once said: “He who passively accepts evil is as much
involved in it as he who helps to perpetrate it. He who
accepts evil without protesting against it is really
cooperating with it”. And if the collective interest in
our shared humanity does not motivate us to act, then
the self-interest of our own security should. After all,
a stockpile of chemical and biological weapons does
not respect national sovereignty or recognize territorial
integrity. Who among us would be secure if the
chemical and biological weapons of another Member
State fell into the wrong hands? That is why Canada
calls on the Syrian regime to ensure that its stockpile of chemical weapons remains secure against possible use
or proliferation by those who would do evil.
When the post-Al-Qadhafi Libya declared its
willingness to destroy previously unknown stockpiles,
Canada stepped in and provided $6 million to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in order to achieve that vital objective. Until such an
opportunity arises in Syria, Canada stands ready
to assist neighbouring States in taking measures to
reduce the threat of the proliferation of those terrible
weapons. Until that time, Canada continues to call for
an immediate end to the violence. Al-Assad must be
replaced by a new order that protects Syria’s territorial
integrity and all the rights of each and every citizen.
I have seen the despair of the Syrian people first
hand on the Jordanian border, where a little girl heart-
wrenchingly told me that all she wanted to do was to go
home. That experience will no doubt leave a lasting scar
on the children caught in the middle of the tragedy. We
must ensure that they have the opportunity for a better
life — for a life free of fear and full of opportunity.
I pledge that Canada will work to address the urgent
humanitarian crises wrought by the violence of the past
18 months. It behoves all Member States in a position
to do so to improve conditions for the Syrian civilians
affected by their great struggle against tyranny in
pursuit of dignity.
Today, the most significant threat to global peace
and security remains the regime in Iran. It refuses to
comply with Security Council resolutions. It routinely
threatens the very existence of the State of Israel. It
foments hatred against the Jewish people and incites
genocide. It provides aid, comfort and support to
terrorist groups. It is guilty of the widespread and
massive repression of the human rights of its own people,
including gays, lesbians and religious minorities.
A nuclear Iran would embolden an already reckless
regime and would perpetuate a very destabilizing
factor not just for an already fragile region, but also
for the entire planet. The Government of Canada has
not only formally listed the Iranian regime as a State
sponsor of terrorism under Canadian law, but we have
also suspended diplomatic relations. Some may ask
why a country committed to openness and engagement
would suspend relations. We do not take such decisions
lightly.
On a practical level, the regime’s blatant disregard
for the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations created real and legitimate concern for the safety and
security of our civilian diplomats. But there is also a great
principle at stake. While Canada prizes engagement
and open relations, there can be no open engagement
with a regime that dishonours its word, repudiates
its commitments and threatens to perpetuate crimes
against humanity. Canada’s philosophy is captured in
the wisdom of Dag Hammarskjöld, the second United
Nations Secretary-General, killed 51 years ago while
fighting for peace and justice. He advised: “Never, for
the sake of peace and quiet, deny your own experience
or convictions”. That is why Canada has imposed some
of the toughest economic sanctions against the Iranian
regime.
However, let me be absolutely clear. Our quarrel
is not with the people of Iran, but with the regime,
which aims to silence their voices. Canada urges Iran
to comply with its international nuclear obligations and
to cease sensitive enrichment activities. We support
the process of the five plus one group of countries.
Iran needs to seize the opportunity provided by the
international community and negotiate in good faith
by showing demonstrable progress and by meeting its
nuclear obligations.
The Iranian regime still has the chance to redeem
itself. In fact, I encourage Iran to follow the example
of some of its neighbours, some of whom Canada has
supported in building nuclear energy programmes for
peaceful purposes. We will continue to work closely
with the United States, the European Union and
other allies to put pressure on Iran to comply with its
important international nuclear obligations. Rather than
accept as inevitable the conflict that Iran seems intent
on provoking, Canada seeks a peaceful alternative. Iran
must act immediately to stop all enrichment and must
abandon technology that could be used for weapons.
Iran is testing the will of the international community
to its utmost. That, too, must end.
The world’s security is closely linked to the third
goal that should animate this Organization, namely,
protecting the dignity and worth of every person by
upholding and protecting fundamental freedoms. The
great poet Kahlil Gibran inspired us to remember that
safeguarding the rights of others is the most noble and
beautiful goal of a human being.
That principle is not simply a question of beliefs and
values. It includes a requirement for action. Protecting
human rights and human dignity is an obligation that
each State owes its citizens. It is a mutual obligation that all members of the international community must
share. History teaches us that an open society that is
tolerant, pluralistic and free is the best guarantor of
human rights and dignity.
A threat to the security of humankind is often
coupled with the crushing of human rights. Yet human
rights abuses that do not threaten security still concern
us. The enslavement of others is a vicious human rights
abuse. It takes many forms, such as the notorious
political prisoner camps of North Korea, the forcible
recruitment by the Mouvement du 23 mars group
in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and the early
and forced marriage of young girls, which is a truly
barbaric form of slavery. Another despicable type of
enslavement is the criminalization of sexuality: jailing,
torturing and killing people for who they are and whom
they love. Other abuses enslave the soul by suppressing,
sometimes with brutal force, the right to worship
freely, to practise a faith and to hold religious beliefs.
Assaults on human dignity, wherever they occur, are
unacceptable.
At the start of my address, I observed that results
matter. This Organization was created to achieve
certain goals, and it will be measured by its success
in doing so. No one ever said that it would be easy to
make real progress in advancing the prosperity, well-
being, security and dignity of humankind. It is not easy
but it is essential. Despite the challenges, the frequent
setbacks and the cost, which is often heavy, we know
that the nations and peoples of the world are up to the
challenge. As we celebrate Mohandas Gandhi’s birthday
tomorrow, let us be inspired by his words: “You must
not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is an ocean; if a
few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not
become dirty.”
Emboldened and bolstered by our faith in humanity,
let us move forward together to secure the results that
this Organization was established to achieve.
constant is change”.

The only constant is change. Indeed, our world
continues to change and at a rapid pace in all domains.
At the geopolitical level, change means a rebalancing
of power and new opportunities. Not since the Cold
War has so much change occurred so quickly. In
these turbulent times, when change can be swift and
unexpected, it is all the more important that we focus
with precision on the constants that remain true.

Canada is a maritime nation bordered by three
oceans. Please allow me, then, to use a nautical﻿May I first take this
opportunity to congratulate my very good friend, the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine, on his election as President
of the General Assembly at its fifty-second session and to
convey to him the best wishes of Canada for a successful
and productive association in this session. I know from
our long personal contacts that the course of this
important debate is in the best possible hands.
Let me also take the opportunity to thank and
congratulate Ambassador Razali for his tireless and
effective leadership of the General Assembly at the fifty-
first session.
I come to the Assembly today with a sense of
urgency and an abiding faith and belief that we are now
emerging, not only from the shadows of the cold war, but
also from the uncertainties of its aftermath.

Around the world, we see countless examples of the
basic principles and overall vision of the United Nations
Charter being put into practice. The people of the world
are laying the foundations of a new international system
for the new millennium.

Of course, I recognize that no part of the world is
without its burdens of conflict, grief and personal
suffering. Nor are there any great signs of relief from the
growing burden of global economic inequities. What has
changed, however, is the new international willingness to
face the issues, to mobilize political will and to launch
reforms. There is a sense, not of helplessness, but of
hope. The old realities of power have not disappeared,
but alongside them have appeared new forces, new
coalitions and new ways of doing business — and these
forces are impatient. As we have seen, in fact, in recent
days, one person's vision and generosity can make a
difference and stand as an inspiration to us all.
This new spirit needs to be manifest and inspire
the work of the United Nations. The Secretary-General
has proposed a serious and far-sighted set of reforms.
Canada strongly supports these proposals and accepts
them as a package. They promise not simply greater
efficiency, but, we hope, greater effectiveness. Based
on our experiences in Canada, I can say with some
authority that budget-cutting by itself is not the answer.
There must be serious structural change to modernize
existing institutions, both national and international, that
were formed over 50 years ago.
To undertake these reforms, solutions must be
based on agreement and cooperation. Solutions cannot
be imposed by one country or one group, but rather
must be inspired by a sense of openness and
innovation. In other words, we must establish a new
compact amongst United Nations Members to set this
Organization on a sound financial footing. As
Mr. Udovenko has said, we are at a watershed, a
defining moment for the Organization that can either
provide new momentum or stall our advance. The
direction we take is ours collectively to decide and the
outcome in all our hands. We must not waste this
opportunity.
(spoke in French)
Another defining moment, I believe, took place
just over a week ago in Oslo. Ninety nations, spurred
on by the efforts of the non-governmental
organizations, agreed on the text of a treaty banning
anti-personnel landmines. The treaty will be signed this
coming December, just 14 months after it was first
conceived.
(spoke in English)
While visiting the treaty discussions in Oslo, I was
forcibly struck by how what has become known as the
Ottawa process demonstrates the changed character of
world affairs. Above all, it shows how the breakdown
of the old bipolar world affords new opportunities for
civil society, private individuals, to influence
multilateral diplomacy. The focus of the Ottawa process
19


is a weapon that slaughters countless civilians, a weapon
that has lost much of its military utility, whatever some
may say. This illustrates the growing feeling, coming
from the grass roots of the world community, that the
engines of war designed for the twentieth century have
no place in the twenty-first.
I should say that this is not the only example of the
new grass-roots activism which points to the emergence
of a global commons as a powerful positive force of
globalization. For example, Canadian women, appalled at
the treatment of their sisters in Afghanistan, have started
a letter-writing campaign. I will be delivering some 5,000
letters today to the Secretary-General, which call on him
to take the lead in exposing the gross human rights
violations of women in Afghanistan as unacceptable in
the eyes of the world's citizens.
The effectiveness of these new forces can be clearly
measured. Nations from every region of the world have
pledged to sign on to a complete ban on the stockpiling,
production, export and use of anti-personnel landmines.
We hope to see more join our ranks between now and
December. For those who are still on the sidelines, we
ask them to think hard and deep on this issue. Their
engagement is crucial. By joining us, already a majority
of United Nations Member States, they can help rid the
world of this most inhumane weapon.
(spoke in French)
Canada recently announced its intention to destroy
its remaining stocks of anti-personnel mines before
signature of the treaty. We will also shortly ratify the
amended Protocol II of the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons.
(spoke in English)
This treaty constitutes a promise to future
generations. But it does not resolve the equally grave
problems posed by mines already in the ground, nor does
it address the plight of those who have experienced
directly their dreadful impact.
Following the signing of the treaty, the international
community will have an obligation to develop policies for
an enhanced and coordinated approach to humanitarian
demining, and to victim assistance and rehabilitation.
This is, as much as anything else, a development
issue. Heavily mined areas of the world cannot pursue
economic development until they have been demined;
and demining is a hopeless task if there is no treaty to
prevent the laying of new mines.
At Ottawa in December, we will invite nations to
engage in a second phase of the campaign: a broad
mobilization of groups and countries to tackle the
aftermath of the landmines crisis. It is a monumental
task, to be met only through the combined action of all
States. We invite all present to join us. The generosity
of private citizens such as Ted Turner, or of the Auto
Workers' Union of Canada, and the commitment of
those like Princess Diana must be matched, indeed
surpassed, by the Governments of this world.
It is important to ask what is behind this
willingness to tackle these old problems in a new way?
What has brought us to the intersection of high hopes
and new strategies, and the real ability to effect change
in the world, as exemplified by the landmines
campaign? To my mind, these developments and, above
all the recognition of the need to adopt new approaches,
are in part a response to the changing face of war.
In the second half of the twentieth century, we
have seen one type of conflict become prevalent. These
are wars fought within, not between, States; wars that
tend to be long and bitter; and wars, above all, in which
civilians suffer the most and children and women are
often deliberately targeted. These are wars in which, in
the words of Saint-Exupéry “the firing line passes
through the hearts of people”.
As this type of war increasingly accounts for the
great majority of all conflicts, the distinctions that once
informed the work of international diplomacy —
between military security concerns and humanitarian or
civil concerns — break down. This blurring of the
lines, along with heightened media presence, has
strongly affected international opinion. Fewer and fewer
people are willing to view war as an acceptable
instrument of state policy.
In the light of these changes, the concept of
human security, which I highlighted when I addressed
the Assembly last year, takes on growing relevance. It
is based on the premise that it is not enough to spare
people from the “scourge of war” narrowly defined.
Ensuring true, sustainable human security means
tackling other severe threats: the unmet needs of more
than a billion people living in poverty; attacks on
human rights of individuals and groups within society;
20


transnational threats, such as crime and terrorism; and
threats to health and livelihood through depletion or
pollution of our resources.
The problems of these new global issues will not
wait for long-term solutions. It is urgent that we take
action to prevent or reduce the incidence of conflict, to
restore societies in the aftermath of conflict and to
increase human security around the world.
The priorities for action can, in my view, be
grouped under three main headings: addressing issues
which cut across traditional boundaries between areas of
concern, such as we have in the landmines campaign;
identifying and addressing the root causes of conflict; and
improving our ability to respond to crises when we
cannot prevent them.
Let me talk about that first priority. Landmines are
not the only complex, cross-cutting problem to be
addressed if we are to reduce the impact of conflict. All
too often it is small arms, rather than the major weapons
systems targeted by our disarmament efforts, that cause
the greatest bloodshed. In the hands of terrorists,
criminals, the irregular militia and armed bands typical of
internal conflict, these are the true weapons of mass
terror. As with landmines, their victims are all too often
civilians.
We welcome the recent report of the United Nations
Panel of Governmental Experts on Small Arms and
discussions within the United Nations Disarmament
Commission on disarming combatants as a step towards
more lasting peace. These should serve as the launching
pad from which to develop practical measures, in
consultation with regional bodies.
(spoke in French)
To tackle this problem, the first steps must be to
combat illicit trafficking in firearms and to bring greater
transparency to the legal exportation of small arms. The
Organization of American States (OAS) is currently
working towards an Inter-American convention on illicit
trafficking in firearms. Canada hopes that the OAS
negotiations will result in an effective convention and
will also inspire other regional bodies to take action.
(spoke in English)
Ridding the world of anti-personnel landmines and
banning or limiting other forms of weapons directly
reduce the human suffering caused by conflict. The
other side of the same coin is building and enhancing
human security. By building peace, reducing
unsustainable military expenditures, promoting equitable
and sustainable development and encouraging stable,
democratic societies which respect human rights, we
not only limit human suffering, but we also address the
root causes of conflict itself.
To do this requires solutions that are built from
the inside, not imposed from the outside. Sustainable
peace can be built only through the active cooperation
and participation of Governments, peoples, and groups
caught in the conflict itself.
At the same time, a parallel effort is required to
reform the United Nations development funds and
programmes. Canada strongly supports the Secretary-
General's reform proposals in this area. We place
priority on improving coordination within the United
Nations system at the country level, including among
the specialized agencies and the Bretton Woods
institutions, in order to maximize development impact.
Canada, through diplomacy and development
assistance, has supported peace-building activities in
certain regions for many years. To give further impetus
to this approach, last October I announced the Canadian
peace-building initiative. Its aim is to coordinate
Canadian programmes and policies in support of
conflict prevention and resolution, peace-building and
post-conflict reconstruction. A peace-building
mechanism or fund has provided a rapid response
mechanism in areas of conflict.
Over the last six months, we have used this peace-
building fund for the following purposes: to provide
critical start-up funding for the historical clarification
Commission in Guatemala; to assist the preparatory
commission for the establishment of an international
criminal court by underwriting the participation of
delegates from developing countries; and to provide
financial assistance for the work of the joint United
Nations/Organization of African Unity (OAU) Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region of Africa,
Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun.
In addition, Canada is prepared to contribute up to
$500,000 from this fund for the establishment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina of a non-governmental organization
foundation to develop civil society on the basis of
21


multi-ethnic cooperation. I urge other members to join us
in supporting this foundation.
Finally, I am pleased to announce a Canadian
contribution of $500,000 from the peace-building fund to
the new United Nations Trust Fund for Preventive
Action, created by the Secretary-General in response to a
proposal from the Norwegian Government.
A second promising area of work on the root causes
of conflict lies in exploring the links between security
and development, and particularly in reducing levels of
military expenditures relative to economic and social
spending. Last year Canada sponsored, together with the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) a symposium on military expenditures in
developing countries which brought together a wide range
of experts who identified areas for further action: small-
arms proliferation, about which I have just spoken,
regional security, good governance and the rule of law.
The United Nations has established important tools
to build the confidence necessary for reductions in
military spending, in the form of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms and the United Nations
standardized reports on national military expenditures.
Much more work is needed, particularly at the regional
level, to identify ways to reduce military spending and to
redirect scarce national resources to the economic and
social development goals.
A third area of attention is work on conflict that
comes from threats to environmental sustainability.
Environmental problems have the capacity to imperil
living standards and to endanger the well-being of future
generations. For these reasons, Canada strongly supports
new agreements on hazardous chemicals, including
persistent organic pollutants, and will work to ensure the
success of the new intergovernmental forum on forests.
Combating desertification also remains a priority for us,
and we have offered to host the Desertification
Convention secretariat.
The fourth and final promising area in addressing
the root causes of conflict is human rights and good
governance. Next year we celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. This is an opportunity for all of us to reaffirm
strongly the fundamental importance of this document
and our commitment to the common standards it sets out.
In recognition of the importance of this
anniversary, Canada will be sponsoring a broad
programme of activities, including a major world
conference on human rights and the Internet, to draw
together work being done in many international forums,
with a focus on strategies for using the new
international telecommunications technology to increase
respect for human rights. We are working on the
development and publication of an annual report on the
state of human rights worldwide, based on the findings
of the United Nations independent human rights
mechanisms. And we will hold a conference reviewing
the impact of the 1993 Vienna Declaration, to be held
by Canadian non-governmental organizations.
Abuse of human rights is sometimes excused as
necessary in the interests of stability and national
security, but the facts show otherwise. Countries with
democratic governments which respect the fundamental
rights of their citizens are less likely to wage war on
one another. They are also more likely over time to
achieve high levels of economic development.

Recognizing this, Canada has recently undertaken
a series of new bilateral human rights initiatives. Our
aim is to work with our counterparts in other countries
to establish discussions between governments to foster
exchanges between institutions devoted to the protection
of human rights and civil-society initiatives and projects
for the development of free media.

We also fully support the Secretary-General’s
proposals for reform measures to enhance United
Nations work in human rights. And we welcome the
appointment of Mary Robinson as High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and offer her our support.
As we move towards the fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the challenges
facing the international community, if anything, have
increased. The trend towards targeting civilians in
warfare has resulted in severe infringements of the
basic rights of women and children. Too often we have
seen children recruited as soldiers or women subjected
to sexual assault as a deliberate weapon of terror.
Canada continues to make the rights of the child
and of women, both in conflict and in peace, a top
22


human rights priority, which we pursue actively in the
United Nations and elsewhere. We welcome the
appointment of Mr. Olara Otunnu as Special
Representative to study the impact of armed conflict on
children. We will shortly host a preparatory meeting for
the main donor countries invited to the Oslo child labour
conference. And domestically we have launched a Child
Labour Challenge Fund to support the efforts of our
private sector to address the problem of exploitative child
labour.
Nowhere is the link between human rights and
human security clearer than in the issue of children’s
rights. By protecting the basic rights of the world’s
children, we are nurturing a future generation of citizens
with both the means and the desire to live in peace.
The final overall priority for action is crisis
response. And despite our best efforts, there will be times
when conflict looms, or when it cannot be prevented.
These situations call for rapid, decisive action, whether to
forestall conflict or contain it when it breaks out. These
actions include not only peacekeeping and other military
measures, but also humanitarian and judicial responses.
To date, the international community appears to
have identified the lessons that the missions to Somalia,
Bosnia, Rwanda and Zaire have taught us, but not to
have learned from them. In crisis situations, speed is the
key to effective response. This is why Canada has been
so active in efforts to develop a United Nations rapid-
response and deployment capability, in particular a
rapidly deployable mission headquarters here in New
York. This would not only permit the timely insertion of
military forces, but also integrate civilian and
humanitarian organizations into mission planning and
deployment.
Canada hopes to see measurable progress on the
rapidly deployable headquarters and on the Danish-led
Standby Forces High-Readiness Brigade initiative. These
improvements to the United Nations rapid-response
capability are complementary, feasible and should be
implemented without delay. Let us learn our lesson, and
not ignore it once again.
In addition to rapid military and humanitarian
reaction, a key element of the United Nations response to
conflict is the application of justice and the international
rule of law. Canada strongly supports the timely
establishment of an independent, effective international
criminal court. In order to be effective, the court must
have inherent jurisdiction over the core crimes of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. In
order to be independent, the court must not be
precluded from dealing with matters on the Security
Council agenda.
In conclusion, let me say that, as we all recognize,
the United Nations was originally established as an
instrument of international peace. Since that time, war
has put on a new face. More and more, it has targeted
primarily civilian populations. If the United Nations is
to be effective — and I believe that the need for
effective multilateralism has never been greater — the
United Nations must adapt to this changing face of war.
At the same time, the United Nations must also
recognize that it, too, has changed at its very
foundation. Both its membership and its mandate have
expanded, and the growing importance of United
Nations development and humanitarian activities have
made their mark. Clearly, it is time for concerted
reflection on the purpose and functioning of this body
that we have built together — including on the difficult
issues of financing and reform of the Security Council.
The reform and expansion of the Security Council
is a major undertaking of direct concern to all Member
States. The long-term implications must be fully
debated and carefully weighed, and the process must be
fair and open. It must attract a broad consensus and
cannot be rushed to accommodate other goals —
including a short-term solution to the United Nations
financial crisis. Canada wants to see a Security Council
that is effective, transparent, broadly representative and,
above all, less elitist and more democratic. The primary
criteria for membership should be commitment to the
ideals and undertakings of the United Nations and a
willingness to remain always accountable to the full
membership of this Assembly.
Broader United Nations reform must necessarily
fail so long as Member States continue to demand more
of a system to which they contribute less. Effective
leadership and moral authority are rooted in respect for
undertakings and obligations freely entered into by
Member States. It is the responsibility of each and
every Member to pay its dues. These obligations apply
in full, on time and without conditions.
Looking ahead, there may be a time when we will
choose to reconsider aspects of the current financial
underpinnings of the United Nations. Indeed, we may
23


collectively decide that in order to broaden
responsibilities and share power in ways that better
reflect current international realities, some adjustments to
the scale of assessments are warranted. Such decisions,
however, can be neither prejudged nor presumed, and
would no doubt be influenced by the commitment of
those advocating such changes to the broader purposes of
this Organization.
The international context in which the United
Nations functions has changed profoundly. Around the
world, people are reshaping the way they live — be it by
seeking more food, better air or greater democracy.
Crucial to this massive transformation is the search for
security, through both the reduction of conflict and the
building of a better life in times of peace. The United
Nations has long symbolized these dual hopes, for escape
from “the scourge of war” and for “better standards of
life in larger freedom”.
I close my remarks today on a note of hope, quoting
President Václav Havel of the Czech Republic, who said,
“Hope is definitely not the same thing as optimism.
It is not a conviction that something will turn out
well, but the certainty that something makes sense,
regardless of how it turns out.”
Our hope lies in the certainty that the United Nations, as
the standard-bearer of international values, of a sense of
multilateralism and of a sense of cooperation and
partnership, makes sense for all of us. This must spur us
on in this Assembly for the challenges that lie ahead.










﻿Five years ago, when I first
addressed this Assembly, the cold war had only just
ended and the transition to a new era was beginning.
Now, together, we are making that historic transition.
Behind us, we leave a century full of humanity's capacity
for the worst and its genius for the best. Before us, at the
dawn of a new millennium, we can envision a new era
that escapes the twentieth century's darkest moments,
fulfils its most brilliant possibilities and crosses frontiers
yet unimagined.
We are off to a promising start. For the first time in
history, more than half the people represented in this
Assembly freely choose their own Governments. Free
markets are growing, spreading individual opportunity and
national well-being. Early in the twenty-first century,
more than 20 of this Assembly's members - home to
half the earth's population - will lift themselves from
the ranks of low-income nations.
Powerful forces are bringing us closer together,
profoundly changing the way we work, live and relate to
each other. Every day, millions of our citizens on every
continent use laptops and satellites to send information,
products and money across the planet in seconds. Bit by
bit, the information age is chipping away at barriers -
economic, political and social - that once kept people
locked in and ideas locked out. Science is unravelling
mysteries in the tiniest of human genes and in the vast
cosmos. Never in the course of human history have we
had a greater opportunity to make our people healthier
and wiser, to protect our planet from decay and abuse and
to reap the benefits of free markets without abandoning
the social contract and its concern for the common good.
Yet today's possibilities are not tomorrow's
guarantees. We have work to do.
7


The forces of global integration are a great tide,
inexorably wearing away the established order of things.
But we must decide what will be left in its wake. People
fear change when they feel its burdens but not its benefits.
They are susceptible to misguided protectionism and to the
poisoned appeals of extreme nationalism, and ethnic, racial
and religious hatreds. New global environmental challenges
require us to find ways to work together without damaging
legitimate aspirations for progress. We are all vulnerable to
the reckless acts of rogue States and to an unholy axis of
terrorists, drug traffickers and international criminals.
These twenty-first-century predators feed on the free
flow of information, ideas and people we cherish. They
abuse the vast power of technology to build black markets
for weapons, to compromise law enforcement with huge
bribes of illicit cash and to launder money with the
keystroke of a computer. These forces are our enemies. We
must face them together because no one can defeat them
alone.
To seize the opportunities and move against the threats
of this new global era, we need a new strategy of security.
Over the past five years, nations have begun to put that
strategy in place through a new network of institutions and
arrangements, with distinct missions, but a common
purpose: to secure and strengthen the gains of democracy
and free markets while turning back their enemies.
We see this strategy taking shape on every continent:
in expanded military alliances, such as the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), its Partnership for Peace and
its partnerships with a democratic Russia and a democratic
Ukraine; in free trade arrangements, such as the World
Trade Organization and the global Information Technology
Agreement, and in the movement towards free-trade areas
by nations in the Americas, the Asia-Pacific region and
elsewhere around the world; in strong arms-control regimes,
such as the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; in
multinational coalitions with zero tolerance for terrorism,
corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and in binding
international commitments to protect the environment and
safeguard human rights.
Through this web of institutions and arrangements,
nations are setting the international ground rules for the
twenty-first century, laying a foundation for security and
prosperity for those who live within them, while isolating
those who challenge them from the outside. This system
will develop and endure only if those who follow the rules
of peace and freedom fully reap their rewards. Only then
will our people believe that they have a stake in
supporting and shaping the emerging international system.
The United Nations must play a leading role in this
effort, filling in the fault lines of the new global era. The
core missions it has pursued during its first half century
will be just as relevant during the next half century: the
pursuit of peace and security, promoting human rights and
moving people from poverty to dignity and prosperity
through sustainable development.
Conceived in the cauldron of war, the United
Nations first task must remain the pursuit of peace and
security. For 50 years the United Nations has helped
prevent world war and nuclear holocaust. Unfortunately,
conflicts between nations, and within nations, have
endured. From 1945 until today, they have cost 20 million
lives. Just since the end of the cold war, each year there
have been more than 30 armed conflicts in which more
than 1,000 people have lost their lives - including, of
course, a quarter of a million killed in the former
Yugoslavia and more than half a million in Rwanda.
Millions of personal tragedies the world over are a
warning that we dare not be complacent or indifferent;
trouble in a far corner can become a plague on everyone's
house. People the world over cheer the hopeful
developments in Northern Ireland, grieve over the loss of
innocent lives and the stalling of the peace process in the
Middle East and long for a resolution of the differences
on the Korean peninsula, between Greece and Turkey or
between the great nations of India and Pakistan as they
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of their birth.
The United Nations continues to keep many nations
away from bloodshed: in El Salvador and Mozambique;
in Haiti and Namibia; in Cyprus; and in Bosnia, where so
much remains to be done but can still be done because
the bloodshed has ended.
The United Nations record of service has left a
legacy of sacrifice. Just last week we lost some of our
finest sons and daughters in the crash of a United Nations
helicopter in Bosnia. Five were American, five German,
one Polish and one British - all citizens of the world we
are trying to make, each a selfless servant of peace. The
world is poorer for their passing.
At this very moment, the United Nations is keeping
the peace in 16 countries, often in partnership with
regional organizations such as NATO, the Organization of
American States, the Association of South-East Asian
8


Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, avoiding wider conflicts and even greater suffering.
Our shared commitment to more realistic peacekeeping
training for United Nations troops, a stronger role for
civilian police and better integration between military and
civilian agencies - all these will help the United Nations
fulfil these missions in the years ahead.
At the same time, we must improve the United
Nations capabilities after a conflict ends to help peace
become self-sustaining. The United Nations cannot build
nations, but it can help nations build themselves by
fostering legitimate institutions of government, monitoring
elections and laying a strong foundation for economic
reconstruction.
This week the Security Council will hold an
unprecedented ministerial meeting on African security,
which our Secretary of State is proud to chair, and which
President Mugabe, Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, will address. It will highlight the role the United
Nations can and should play in preventing conflict on a
continent where amazing progress towards democracy and
development is occurring alongside still too much discord,
disease and distress.
In the twenty-first century our security will be
challenged increasingly by interconnected groups that traffic
in terror, organized crime and drug smuggling. Already,
these international crime and drug syndicates drain up to
$750 billion a year from legitimate economies. That sum
that exceeds the combined gross national product of more
than half the nations in this Hall. These groups threaten to
undermine confidence in the fragile new democracies and
market economies that so many of you are working so hard
to see endure.
Two years ago I called upon all the members of this
Assembly to join in the fight against these forces. I applaud
the recent United Nations resolution calling on its Members
to join the major international anti-terrorism conventions,
making clear the emerging international consensus that
terrorism is always a crime and never a justifiable political
act. As more countries sign on, terrorists will have fewer
places to run or hide. I also applaud the steps that Members
are taking to implement the Declaration on Crime and
Public Security that the United States proposed two years
ago, calling for increased cooperation to strengthen every
citizen's right to basic safety, through cooperation on
extradition and asset forfeiture, shutting down grey markets
for guns and false documents, attacking corruption and
bringing higher standards to law enforcement in new
democracies.
The spread of these global criminal syndicates also
has made all the more urgent our common quest to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
them to fall into or remain in the wrong hands. Here too,
the United Nations must lead, and it has led - from the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq to the
International Atomic Energy Agency, now the most
expansive global inspection system ever devised to police
arms-control agreements.
When we met here last year, I was honoured to be
the first of 146 leaders to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), our commitment to end
all nuclear tests for all time, the longest-sought, hardest-
fought prize in the history of arms control. It will help
prevent the nuclear Powers from developing more
advanced and more dangerous weapons. It will limit the
possibilities for other States to acquire such devices. I am
pleased to announce that today I am sending this crucial
Treaty to the United States Senate for ratification. Our
common goal should be for the CTBT to enter into force
as soon as possible. I ask for of you to support that goal.
The United Nations second core mission must be to
defend and extend universal human rights and to help
democracy's remarkable gains endure. Fifty years ago the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights
stated the international community's conviction that
people everywhere have the right to be treated with
dignity, to give voice to their opinions and to choose their
leaders; that these rights are universal - not American
rights, not Western rights, not rights for the developed
world only, but rights inherent in the humanity of people
everywhere.
Over the past decades these rights have become a
reality for more people than ever, from Asia to Africa,
from Europe to the Americas. In a world that links rich
and poor, North and South, city and countryside in an
electronic network of shared images in real time, the
more these universal rights take hold, the more people
who do not enjoy them will demand them. Armed with
photocopiers and fax machines, e-mail and the Internet;
supported by an increasingly important community of
non-governmental organizations, they will make their
demands known, spreading the spirit of freedom -
which, as the history of the last 10 years has shown us,
ultimately will prevail.
9


The United Nations must be prepared to respond -
not only by setting standards but by implementing them. To
deter abuses, we should strengthen the United Nations field
operations and early-warning systems. To strengthen
democratic institutions - the best guarantors of human
rights - we must pursue programmes to help new legal,
parliamentary and electoral institutions get off the ground.
To punish those responsible for crimes against humanity,
and to promote justice so that peace endures, we must
maintain our strong support for the United Nations war-
crime tribunals and truth commissions. And before the
century ends, we should establish a permanent international
court to prosecute the most serious violations of
humanitarian law.
The United States welcomes the Secretary General's
efforts to strengthen the role of human rights within the
United Nations system and his splendid choice of Mary
Robinson as the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We will work hard to make sure that she has the
support she needs to carry out her mandate.
Finally, the United Nations has a special responsibility
to make sure that as the global economy creates greater
wealth, it does not produce growing disparities between the
haves and have-nots or threaten the global environment, our
common home. Progress is not yet everyone's partner.
More than half the world's people are two days' walk from
a telephone, literally disconnected from the global economy.
Tens of millions lack the education, the training and the
skills they need to make the most of their God-given
abilities.
The men and women of the United Nations have
expertise across the entire range of humanitarian and
development activities. Every day they are making a
difference. We see it in nourished bodies of once-starving
children, in the full lives of those immunized against
disease, in the bright eyes of children exposed to education
through the rich storehouse of human knowledge, in
refugees cared for and returned to their homes and in the
health of rivers and lakes restored.
The United Nations must focus even more on shifting
resources from handouts to 'hand ups', on giving people
the tools they need to make the most of their own destinies.
Spreading ideas and education and technology - the true
wealth of nations - is the best way to give the people the
chance to succeed.
The United Nations must continue to lead in ensuring
that today's progress does not come at tomorrow's expense.
When the nations of the world gather again next
December in Kyoto for the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, all of us - developed and developing nations -
must seize the opportunity to turn back the clock on
greenhouse-gas emissions so that we can leave a healthy
planet to our children.
In these efforts, the United Nations no longer can,
and no longer need, go it alone. Innovative partnerships
with the private sector, non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions can leverage its
effectiveness many times over. Last week a truly
visionary American, Ted Turner, made a remarkable
donation to strengthen the United Nations development
and humanitarian programmes. His gesture highlights the
potential for partnership between the United Nations and
the private sector, in contributions of time, resources and
expertise. I hope more will follow his lead.
In this area and others, the Secretary-General is
aggressively pursuing the most far-reaching reform of the
United Nations in its history - not to make the United
Nations smaller as an end in itself, but to make it better.
The United States strongly supports his leadership. We
should pass the Secretary-General's reform agenda at this
session.
On every previous occasion I have addressed this
Assembly, the issue of our country's dues has brought the
commitment of the United States to the United Nations
into question. The United States was a founder of the
United Nations. We are proud to be its host. We believe
in its ideals. We continue to be, as we have been, its
largest contributor. We are committed to seeing the
United Nations succeed in the twenty-first century.
This year, for the first time since I have been
President, we have an opportunity to put the question of
debts and dues behind us once and for all and to put the
United Nations on a sounder financial footing for the
future. I have made it a priority to work with our
Congress on comprehensive legislation that would allow
us to pay off the bulk of our arrears and assure full
financing of America's assessment in the years ahead.
Our Congress's actions to solve this problem reflect a
strong bipartisan commitment to the United Nations and
to America's role within it. At the same time, we look to
Member States to adopt a more equitable scale of
assessments. Let me say that we also strongly support
expanding the Security Council to give more countries a
voice in the most important work of the United Nations.
10


In more equitably sharing responsibility for its successes,
we can make the United Nations stronger and more
democratic than it is today. I ask the General Assembly to
act on these proposals this year so that we can move
forward together.
At the dawn of a new century so full of hope but not
free of peril, more than ever we need a United Nations
where people of reason can work through shared problems
and take action to combat them, where nations of goodwill
can join in the struggle for freedom and prosperity and
where we can shape a future of peace, progress and the
preservation of our planet. We have the knowledge; we
have the intelligence; we have the energy; we have the
resources for the work before us. We are building the
necessary networks of cooperation. The great question
remaining is whether we have the vision and the heart
necessary to imagine a future that is different from the
past - necessary to free ourselves from destructive patterns
of relations with each other and within our own nations and
to live a future that is different.
A new century in a new millennium is upon us. We
are literally present at the future, and it is the great gift we
are obligated to leave to our children.




﻿


163.	I should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly for its thirty-third session. My delegation looks forward to working under the presidency of the Foreign Minister of Colombia, a fellow charter Member of the United Nations from the Western hemisphere with which Canada has the friendliest of relations. The Canadian delegation pledges to you, Sir, its fullest support in fulfilling your heavy responsibilities during the next three months.
164.	I should also like to congratulate Deputy Foreign Minister Mojsov of Yugoslavia on the efficient and decisive way in which he presided over not only the thirty-second regular session of the General Assembly but also three special -sessions, including the very important special session co disarmament.
165.	This year we welcome our new Member, Solomon Islands, whose application Canada was pleased to recommend in the Security Council and to join in sponsoring as a member of the Commonwealth. With the admission of the Solomon Islands the United Nations has attained the bench-mark figure of ISO Member nations and has approached even closer to the goal of universality of membership.
166.	In my statement a year ago13 I was critical of some of the procedures of our Assembly, and 1 still believe that we need to act and to speak so that our people can understand what it is we are doing here and have confidence in our decisions. I do not mean to imply that we ought to agree on everything or even try to settle everything; on the contrary, I think that we should be careful to arrange our agenda so that we concentrate on the major purposes of the United Nations, not on the headlines of the moment.
167.	1 am glad to note that the Secretary-General has echoed some of these sentiments in his annual report on the work of the Organization. But he also emphasizes that the pursuit of global objectives ought to take precedence over 'nationalistic aims'. Let there be no doubt that Canada, too, regards the United Nations as a vital and essential world forum which serves important global purposes.
168.	There are two international issues that have defied solution for more than three decades but which now have reached a crucial turning-point. Peace in the Middle East is closer. An internationally acceptable settlement in Namibia could still be within our grasp. But to make the most cherished hopes of millions come true will require wisdom, patience, fortitude and restraint in the weeks and months ahead.14
169.	Eighteen months ago I joined my colleagues of the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Federal Republic of Germany in a concerted effort to bring about an internationally acceptable settlement in Namibia. Since that day a great deal of progress has been made. Painstaking negotiations and the personal participation of Foreign Ministers at key junctures in the negotiating process have demonstrated what- can be achieved when political will and the determination to succeed are brought together and brought to bear upon seemingly intractable problems. After a year of detailed talks, and in an intensive exploration of all the issues, the five Western members of die Security Council were able to draw up a compromise proposal [Sf12636] which I was privileged to introduce on 25 April to the Assembly's special session. At that same time I was able to announce South Africa's acceptance of the plan.
170.	In July, SWAPO also accepted the Western plan and we were thus able, with the full co-operation of the parties and the active support of the African front-line States, to take, in the Security Council, the first step towards the full implementation of our proposals. It was, therefore, with considerable optimism and satisfaction that we followed the progress of the special survey mission which the Secretary-General dispatched to Namibia, under the leadership of his Special Representative, Mr. Martti Antisaari.
171.	When, on the basis of the findings of that mission, the Secretary-General published his report and his recommendations as to how best he could discharge the mandate given to him by the Security Council, we had every reason to believe that the United Nations finally had in its hands the instrument capable of putting an end to 30 years of controversy and of bringing Namibia to independence in an internationally acceptable manner. It was therefore with shock and dismay that we heard last week of the South African Government's decision to proceed unilaterally with elections in that Territory.
172.	Neither of the reasons invoked by the South African Government is valid. First, I wish to declare most categorically that the Secretary-General's report is fully in line with the original Western proposal. That report is a professional assessment of the human and financial means required to perform the tasks which our proposals call for.
173.	Secondly, apart from a few extreme elements, all of those who have a claim to represent sectors of the Namibian population have clearly expressed their preference for and acceptance of United Nations involvement in the independence process. The churches have done so, the Namibia National Front has done so and, as recently as 15 September, the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance has done so. We simply cannot accept that there is now a need for some form of further consultation.
174.	We are once more facing a grave situation. Our Organization is now in a position to undertake the task of bringing to independence, through peaceful means, a new nation.
175.	We must urge those who wish to stand in the way of such a noble enterprise to reconsider their decision. The South African Government must realize that its defiance of the will of the international community, particularly when that Government has been so closely involved in a long negotiating process, cannot be tolerated. The new Government of South Africa, which we understand will be formed by the end of this month, would be very seriously mistaken if it assumed that its actions in respect of Namibia would have no serious consequences. To those leaders inside Namibia who are being led to believe that they can solve their problems through some sham electoral procedure, I can only say:
'Think of the future of your country. The road you are taking can only lead to a dead end. Make no mistake: a so-called government chosen through the so-called elections currently envisaged by the Administrator-General will never be recognized internationally. Instead of enjoying the benefits of free and close association with the rest of the world, you will only beget more bloodshed and bring about in the long run the destruction of what you hold dear.'
It is not too late and I sincerely hope that all concerned will reconsider their course of action.
176.	The danger signals are clear. On 4 November 1977, in its resolution 418(1977), the Security Council imposed a mandatory arms embargo on South Africa, the first time the provisions of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter
had been invoked against a Member State. This step confirmed a policy voluntarily observed by Canada since 1963. The invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter has rightly been regarded as a grave decision, taken only after the most serious consideration and a careful weighing of the implications. This decision, therefore, reflects our belief that the perpetuation of the apartheid system will result in a continuing deterioration of peace and stability in southern Africa.
177.	Canada has also expressed its support for a call to Governments to review their economic relations with South Africa. Although this element was not incorporated in the Security Council resolution, the Canadian Government nevertheless decided to take certain steps. On 19 December 1977, for example, I announced that Canada was phasing out Government involvement in commercial relations with South Africa and would issue a code of conduct to govern the behaviour of Canadian companies with operations in South Africa. The Canadian Government will continue to keep its present genera] relations with South Africa under review.
178.	My Government is much concerned, too, by the situation in Zimbabwe. We had hoped that the Anglo-American proposals and subsequent action by the Security Council would lead to general agreement. The attempt to follow a different path has had no success, and the country now faces increasing bloodshed and uncertainty. A continuation of the war would also haw the -gravest consequences for the stability of the region as a whole.
179.	Clearly, an early meeting of all parties to the conflict is essential if there is to be any hope of securing peaceful settlement on the basis of the generally accepted Anglo-American plan. Canada continues to hope that the plan may still be successful, and would be willing, in such circumstances, to offer appropriate assistance.
180.	All of us must be heartened by the remarkable progress achieved over the past year towards a just solution of the Middle East conflict. President El-Sadat's historic visit to Jerusalem less than a year ago and the warm reception given to him by Prime Minister Begin and the Israeli people have had a dramatic sequel in the agreements at Camp David. The Government of Canada has sent its congratulations to President Carter, President El-Sadat and Prime Minister Begin on this act of statesmanship. The prospect of a real and durable peace is now much closer, although serious issues remain to be resolved.
181.	Canada supported and encouraged the negotiating process begun in Jerusalem. We welcomed the bold initiative of President Carter in again bringing the Heads of Government of Israel and Egypt together at Camp David and we endorse the agreements reached there. They are a milestone on the long road to peace, a road which Canadian soldiers have watched over for more than 20 years. We hope that after due consideration the nations concerned will find that the framework established at Camp David constitutes a sound basis for moving towards a general peace settlement.
182.	The process of direct negotiation on the difficult and sensitive issues at the heart of the problem must continue. All parties face agonizing and hard decisions. But my
Government is confident that the will exists to take the next steps. Meanwhile, the deliberations of this Assembly should serve to bolster confidence between the parties and to facilitate their negotiations. Surely we must try to avoid recriminations and polemics now that serious negotiations are under way. I am well aware that deep differences of view exist, nor do I question the sincerity of such views. My plea is that we make an effort to moderate passions, to encourage constructive action in the area and to strengthen the prestige and competence of the United Nations in the search for solutions.
183.	For all concerned these are days of both accomplishment and opportunity which require patience and fortitude. We do not know what the ultimate shape of a peace settlement might be. It might make provision for international involvement to assist in the implementation of its terms. Canada would consider very seriously a request to make an appropriate contribution to such an enterprise Canada also hopes that other aspects of the problem will be addressed in the context of resolutions adopted by the Security Council. It may very well be that generous financial contributions from the international community will be required; here, too, Canada will certainly be prepared to assist within the limits of its capacity.
184.	A third question demanding immediate attention and action is the lack of progress we have made in the United Nations in the protection of human rights throughout the world. A tragic example of this is the situation in Democratic Kampuchea. On 8 September my Government brought to the attention of the Commission on Human Rights a detailed public report which was based on a series of voluntary statements made to Canadian representatives by individual Kampuchean refugees,15 a great many of whom had left Democratic Kampuchea recently. The testimony of the refugees clearly supports allegations from a variety of other sources that the Government of Democratic Kampuchea has systematically violated the fundamental human rights of its citizens and that the repression and the killing are continuing. This situation cries out for the kind of effective action that this Organization should be able to provide.
185.	The Canadian Government considers that an immediate investigation of the human rights situation in Democratic Kampuchea should take place. I urge members of this Assembly to support our recommendation to the Commission on Human Rights to take such action. 1 also ask members of the Assembly to consider their obligations to the increasing numbers of refugees from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea that are now under the care of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
186.	To date, Canada has accepted 7,000 refugees from that area, including those from former Cambodia. In doing so we have accepted the full costs of their resettlement in our country. These costs are in excess of $3.7 million, which Canada regards as an important if indirect contribution to the valuable work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. In the light of the tragic situation in Democratic Kampuchea I wish to take this occasion to announce that Canada will increase from 50 to 70 the number of refugee families from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea we will accept each month. I expect that over the next 12 months more than 1,000 additional refugees will find a new home in Canada. Furthermore, Canada will contribute an additional $500,000 to the High Commissioner for his valuable relief and assistance work in South-East Asia.
187.	The case of Kampuchea is not unique in demonstrating that in the field of human rights the official record of the United Nations creates an illusion of much greater progress than we have managed to make. There is no dearth of promising language on the international statute book. Unfortunately, the gap between promise and performance has not narrowed much. Reports of gross and persistent inhumanity continue to claim the attention of the world community. Governments continue to renege on commitments they have freely assumed in international instruments.
188.	In short, we are still a long way from an international consensus on human rights. Historians will wonder why it should have been so. They will be hard put to explain how we could be very near a consensus on how to preserve the quality of our seas and yet unable to conduct so much as a civil dialogue on how to preserve the dignity of the human person. They will be hard put to explain how we have begun to redistribute resources internationally to sustain human beings in their material needs but could not ensure that men and women would be free to exercise their most elementary human rights.
189.	Human rights are a problem of international dimensions. Their recognition and promotion, as the Secretary-General reminds us, is a legitimate concern of the world community. The new prominence that human rights has acquired is part of the natural evolution of an international system. Like so many other concerns, the concern about human rights can no longer be contained behind national boundaries. It is not a matter of laying down to Governments how they should fashion their political or economic systems. It is simply a matter of making certain that Governments observe the fundamental decencies of civilized life to which they have all pledged allegiance.
190.	The issue of human rights will not go away. We have a clear choice. We can decide that the United Nations must face the issue squarely, or we will be forced to go elsewhere to seek a tolerable international consensus. In the view of the Canadian Government the choice is clear. We believe that the United Nations is ideally equipped to evaluate objectively, dispassionately and impartially allegations of human rights violations. The better it is seen to function the more confidence this Organization will command and the less individual Governments will feel bound to call for actions against others for gross and persistent violations of human rights.
191.	We believe that the United Nations can improve its investigation of allegations of human rights violations. We welcome, therefore, as a significant precedent the decision of the Government of Chile to receive an investigative group. My Government also considers that the capacity of the Office of the Secretary-General to investigate and to intercede when necessary, as well as its authority to do so,
should be augmented. Canada further proposes that the officers of the Commission on Human Rights be empowered to meet between sessions to consider apparent serious violations of human rights and when necessary to make its views known to Governments.
192.	Human rights can be violated in many ways, but surely one of the most despicable is international terrorism. Innocent lives are placed in jeopardy while the culprits often go unpunished or even undetected. Terrorism holds our security and our society to ransom and threatens Governments in all parts of the world. There must be no confusion between ends and means. Terrorism is beyond the bounds of legitimate dissent. It degrades every cause it claims to serve. The international community, which is pledged to eliminate war as an instrument of policy, can hardly accept terrorism as a tolerable aspect of international life.
193.	Resolution 32/8, adopted by consensus at the last session of the General Assembly, deals with a specific aspect of terrorism—hijacking. That resolution calls on Governments to take joint and separate action to ensure the safety of civil aviation, and it .vas strongly endorsed by the Canadian delegation. We have continued to stress the need for further international action to combat terrorism in all its manifestations. Prime Minister Trudeau's initiative in developing and presenting a declaration on hijacking at the Bonn Economic Summit Conference in July clearly underlined Canada's commitment to take action to deal with this problem. The declaration commits the seven Governments to suspending air links with countries which do not extradite or prosecute hijackers who come within their jurisdictions. Participants at the Bonn meeting urged other Governments to associate themselves with that commitment. Many Governments have indicated that they are prepared to do so. Today we urge all other members of the international community to follow this course as well.
194.	As Canada nears the end of its latest term on the Security Council I inevitably have mixed feelings. We have welcomed the opportunity to play a direct part in contributing towards the resolution of the issues of peace and war brought to the Council. We have participated, I believe effectively, in some very important decisions. But we have also felt some frustrations, which I suppose are shared by most non-permanent members. Periods of service on the Council are too infrequent to build an extensive background of experience or to have much impact on the way the Council meets the responsibilities set out for it in the Charter. We have been impressed by the progress the Council has made since our last term 10 years ago. There has been the adoption of quietly effective negotiating techniques which have encouraged a sense of co-operation and collegial spirit in its work. We think that for the most part the Council has done a good job in dealing with the matters before it.
195.	But we have not changed our view that the Council is too passive. All too frequently it turns a blind eye to situations which clearly constitute a threat to international peace and security. It continues to ignore its responsibility under the Charter to try to head off such threats before they arrive. In my statement before this Assembly a year ago I expressed the belief that informal and private
exchanges between political leaders represented on the Council would help it to fulfil its responsibilities. In all candour I must report that we found that some of our colleagues were opposed to this approach. However, I continue to be convinced of the value of the concept of periodic meetings of the Council at the ministerial level. Such meetings could give the Council the high-level political direction that is essential if it is to take the initiative in preserving peace when conflict is anticipated, as well as restoring it when conflict has occurred. I know that I am not alone in expressing these views, and I urge those members of the Council, present and future, who share them not to give up their efforts to have the Council fulfil its role as envisioned in the Charter.
196.	I also think it is time to consider again the size of the Council. In 1965, when the membership was increased from 11 to 15, there were 118 Members of the United Nations. Now there are 150. Many States which would contribute well to the work of the Council must wait a generation before they can hope to serve.
197.	Although no longer a member of the Council after the end of this year, Canada will follow with deep interest the Council's deliberations. We will be prepared to contribute in any feasible way to strengthen the Organization's peace-keeping capacity, and to help galvanize its will-power in the spirit of friendly relations, co-operation and harmony called for by the United Nations Charter.
198.	Looking back over the past year I take satisfaction from the tenth special session on disarmament. The disarmament session adopted by consensus; a programme of action that clearly identified the most urgent negotiating tasks, including vigorous pursuit of measures to curb the nuclear-arms race, the conclusion of a nuclear test-ban treaty, and the negotiation of an effective agreement on chemical weapons. Proposals made by my Prime Minister, and by other leaders, are under active discussion in many capitals. The session's Final Document is the most authoritative statement of views, aspirations and objectives ever produced on the subject of arms limitation and reduction. It is our compass and our incentive for the work ahead. We must respond with determination to meet the challenge posed by the programme of action.
199.	The special session on disarmament was a useful reminder, too, of the value of reaching oar conclusions by consensus when important issues are at stake. Improvements in our procedures need to be made if we are to find time for these issues and to discuss them seriously. A number of useful proposals to this end have been made which Canada endorses.
200.	While disarmament may be the ultimate answer to international security, peace-keeping and peace-making are also essential to contain threats to peace. Over the years, Canada has joined many other countries in supporting United Nations peace-keeping missions. We have supplied military or other personnel for every United Nations peace-keeping force which has taken the field, including UNIFIL established last March.
201.	The Council acted promptly and wisely in deciding to insert a United Nations force into the troubled situation
which has prevailed in Southern Lebanon. The organization and subsequent conduct of UNIFIL is a tribute not only to the skilful diplomacy of the Secretary-General and his staff but also to the readiness of Member States from most regions of the world to help with United Nations peacekeeping. We cannot overlook, however, that UNIFIL has encountered problems in fulfilling all the terms of its mandate, and that the Lebanese Government has not yet been able fully to restore its sovereignty.
202.	The future success of UNIFIL will depend on the forbearance and goodwill of all the parties involved, and also, indeed, on the extent to which current and potential contributors to UNIFIL can plan their participation.
203.	States which contribute contingents to peace-keeping forces are bound to be influenced by their perceptions of the kind of co-operation these troops receive from the parties. They will be influenced, too, by the kind of support which these operations receive from the rest of the membership, especially the permanent members of the Security Council. I note with regret that two permanent members have said they will not help pay for UNIFIL.
204.	My country is unusually sensitive to the need for the United Nations to improve its advance planning arrangements for peace-keeping. It was only with considerable dislocation of our own requirements that we were able to supply specialized personnel for UNIFIL, and then only for six months. 1 urge all Member States to consider again the earmarking of personnel, services and equipment for this land of contingency. If the Secretary-General is to carry out the-instructions given to him by the Security Council, which are usually based on the principle of equitable geographical distribution, he must have the widest possible freedom to select the resources required. The lack of readily available communications and logistics personnel is particularly regrettable. It is more than time that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations made firm recommendations on these questions.
205.	Earlier this year I had occasion to assess the situation in Cyprus at first hand. My visit confirmed my view that the parties to the conflict ought to be able to settle their differences by negotiation.
206.	Canada once again has a direct interest in a solution of the Cyprus problem. Canadian contingents have been in Cyprus, as part of the United Nations force, for 14 years. Some of our soldiers are now doing their fourth tour of duty on the island. Many Canadians are beginning to feel that the continued presence of the force, instead of paving the way for a solution, may be a factor in impeding it.
207.	The island of Cyprus, an independent and sovereign State and a sovereign member of the international community, has known a troubled history- I believe that it would serve no useful purpose to attempt to identify those responsible for the events of the past. The international community expects, however, that the Cypriot people will use the resources and dynamism which it shares with its Mediterranean neighbours as well as- the goodwill which exists to prepare a new national programme which will contain guarantees acceptable to all the parties concerned. The legacy of the past will not facilitate matters and, in my
opinion, the- enterprise will even be an impossible one if sustained negotiations are not instituted between the two communities. Without a permanent dialogue, the accommodations which are hinted at from time' to time will remain without any effect. The Secretary-General has offered has good offices to the parties and I would urge them to take full and prompt advantage of them.
208.	I have been discussing important issues of peace and security. We also expect this Assembly to address and influence those economic and social questions which are so vital to the welfare of our peoples. Peace and security will remain distant goals unless the basic economic and social needs of mankind receive adequate attention.
209.	As each of our Governments tried to deal with economic and social issues in the context of our national interests, we become increasingly aware of the wide-ranging effects of our actions, improvements in our economic and social conditions can be found only in policies which fully recognize this interdependence among States and among issues. None can be dealt with effectively in isolation. That is why it is so important for us to discuss these issues effectively in this body.
210.	The industrialized countries account for a major share of international economic activity and their policies therefore have a particular impact upon the health of the world economy. We know that the recent performance of our industrial economies have not been good enough. The leaders of seven major industrialized countries met just over two months ago and agree d on measures which they would take, individually and collectively, to improve this performance. My own Government has since announced a aeries of measures designed to strengthen the growth of the Canadian economy. These efforts to improve our national economic performance are not inward-looking. On the contrary, my Government remains convinced that a truly open world trading system provides the best framework for sustained economic growth for all of us. It also remains convinced that the problems of the industrialized world can best be solved by means which benefit all countries, developed and developing alike.
211.	There is no quick or. easy solution to current domestic or international economic difficulties, particularly those of the world's poorest countries, but some of the imperatives are clear. We must improve economic growth to enhance the international economy's ability to meet the aspirations of developing countries for a more just economic order. We must resist pressures for self-defeating protectionism. We must bend every effort to achieve the successful conclusion of the multilateral trade negotiations, including satisfactory benefits for developing countries as well as for the world's principal traders.
212.	Frank and open exchanges on vital problems affecting the world economy must take place here. But if the General Assembly is to play its proper role in the process of working out equitable solutions to these problems, we need to clarify the mandate of the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 and to make that Committee work. We must give the Committee a mandate
which clearly defines its role as an instrument of the General Assembly. If we ask it to perform tasks which are the proper responsibility of other international bodies, we will do harm to a potentially valuable instrument.
213.	As I said earlier, the dialogue on economic issues continues on many fronts. Some progress is apparent. Prospects for a new food aid convention have improved. Canada will participate actively and constructively in the resumed negotiations on 3 common fund for commodities and we are confident progress can be made there as well. The calendar for 1979 is very challenging: the fifth session of UNCTAD in Manila, the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development in Vienna, the development of a new international development strategy for the 1980s and beyond. Canada has a deep interest in each of these events. This General Assembly session should contribute to their preparation as well as to the preparation of such events as the proposed world conference on renewable sources of energy. I invite delegations to help keep us on the path of consensus in this process. Progress on all of these issues is at times frustratingly slow, but we must persist in our efforts until we succeed.
214.	Over the past year the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has made important progress towards the adoption of a comprehensive treaty for the oceans. I am particularly encouraged by the improvements in the informal composite negotiating text on the prevention and control of vessel source pollution. The new text does not yet fully meet my Government's objectives in this field. Nevertheless, it reflects an increasing awareness by the international community of the need for a more balanced sharing of coastal and flag-State rights and duties. The tragic and devastating oil spill off the French coast earlier this year graphically demonstrated the obsolescence of the traditional rule of flag-State sovereignty.
215.	Most of the major elements of a global oceans treaty are now virtually agreed. What remain are the most difficult hard-core issues relating primarily to an international system for the mining of the deep sea-bed and the translation of the common heritage concept into an equitable system for extracting the minerals of the deep ocean bed. Our goal is unprecedented in international institutions—the establishment of an international organization with both regulatory responsibilities and a role in the actual exploitation of natural resources. The implications of the new economic order are profound and far-reaching. Thus, no matter how exacting or frustrating the negotiations may still be, we cannot afford to let the Conference fail, particularly now that it has accomplished so much and home port is within sight.
216.	Canada agrees, however, that the Conference must be brought to a conclusion as soon as possible. While an arbitrary deadline could impede rather than expedite the work of the Conference, we believe that the negotiations should end during the course of 1979. This would lead, we hope, to the adoption of a draft treaty in the early part of 1980. Canada will give its full support to the attainment of this objective.

111. In conclusion, I think it vital that we remember during the course of this session why we come here every year. Despite its flaws and failures, the United Nations binds us to certain basic principles which are as valid now as they were in 1945. This Organization has stood for a third of a century as witness to the ideal of the common accountability of every nation for enlarging the security, prosperity and dignity of all mankind.
218.	The challenge is to ensure that the United Nations system responds to the complex and changing environment in which we live. Our basic principles must not be encrusted with bureaucratic procedure. The momentum of this institution must be towards the issues of the day, not away from them.
I am confident we will meet this challenge.
﻿103.	Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to this important office.
104.	We all learned this morning with shock and sadness of the sudden death of Pope John Paul I. His passing deprives the world of a wise and compassionate leader whose brief ministry had already given promise of greatness.
106.	A generation ago the United Nations was created by men and women who shared a vision. They saw the need in the wake of war to create stronger international institutions that could dampen the flames of conflict and life nations and people to a new level of material well-being; they saw the need to afford self-determination to millions; and they saw the need for the world community to take a compelling stand against repression, discrimination and the denial of the rights of man.
107. The men and women who gathered in San Francisco in 1945 raised their sights above the differences and divisions of the moment. They dared to see the world as it could be—a world where- those who are hungry are fed; where those who are poor have escaped the degradation of poverty; where diplomacy among nations is a pervasive substitute for violence among nations; and where the resources of the world are used effectively and shared equitably.
108.	In the years since, the record of the United Nations in working towards that vision has been one of accomplishment. It has played an indispensable part in the process of peaceful decolonization, in defusing tensions among nations through its peace-keeping missions, and in promoting , genuine economic and social progress.
109.	Today the Members of this body still share that common vision. And we understand far better than ever before our common destiny: that no nation acting alone can assure for its people peace and economic security; that the future of each of our nations depends upon the future of all of our nations.
110.	Our challenge today is to summon the political, will to act in concert towards the goals we share, to go beyond the rhetoric of interdependence and to begin to recognize its inescapable implications for the national interests of each of us.
111.	We must build a new consensus on this proposition: that in this new era each nation must weigh more carefully than ever before its long-term interest in a healthy global community when making decisions about its immediate concerns. For only through co-operation and compromise in the short run can we assure our longer-term future.
112.	On crucial issues, the coming months will present turning-points of incalculable importance. In negotiations on the Middle East, on southern Africa, on trade, on arms control and on many other pressing problems, genuine progress has been made. Without continued progress, the gains we have already made can be lost.
113.	This point applies not to any single nation nor any group of nations but to every nation, including my own.
114.	The resolution of dangerous regional disputes and progress in limiting weaponry must always be at the top of the immediate international agenda. I shall return to these issues later. But we cannot so concentrate our energies on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is, that we discover too late that international inequities and poverty and injustice within nations make peace among nations impossible.
115.	So let me concentrate my comments today on those issues that so centrally touch people's lives around the globe-economic security, the equitable development of the earth's resources and individual freedom.
116.	Shared economic progress requires a global consensus on the benefits of co-operation among nations. Cooperation and compromise are often difficult. The economic problems we share require long-term efforts, but we are all constrained by domestic concerns which call for immediate attention; the problems we share are so widespread in their impact that solutions cannot be found by a single nation or group of nations; and these problems require more than general agreements. The application of substantial technical and financial resources is necessary. Debate over sterile texts will neither feed the hungry nor create new jobs for the unemployed. Only common action can be effective. And each must contribute if all are to benefit.
117.	Only three or four years ago there was extraordinary tension between North and South. Each side was deeply suspicious of the other's motives. Each held sharply different perceptions of global needs and priorities. But these differences have been narrowed. From the seventh special session of the General Assembly through the fourth session of UNCTAD, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation and the meetings of this Assembly, and through other serious efforts in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the economic summits, agreement has been achieved on several basic issues relating to a new international economic order.
118.	We are agreed on the need to work towards the elimination of poverty in all countries. Concessional aid flows have been increased. More attention is being devoted to food production. Satisfying basic economic needs is becoming a greater priority of the international community.
119.	We are agreed on the urgent need to accelerate equitable non-inflationary growth. The round of multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of GATT now proceeding at Geneva are in their final stages. We are discussing guidelines for international investment. Private capital flows are increasing. The facilities of IMF have been expanded, and discussions are under way to expand the facilities of the multilateral development banks.
120.	We are agreed on the need to reduce economic instability and uncertainty. The IMF is playing a major role in providing balance-of-payments financing to those most severely affected by recent disruptions in the world economy. We are engaged in serious discussions on a variety of commodity arrangements, including a system of internationally co-ordinated national grain reserves.
121.	And we are agreed on the need to facilitate smooth adjustment for workers and businesses that have borne the brunt of changing economic circumstances. The Bonn Economic Summit Conference this year made clear that we must intensify our efforts in this area.
122.	Because we have come far, the road ahead will be even more challenging, for the most difficult issues remain. To maintain our progress, we should be guided by three fundamental principles in the North-South discussions over the coming months. First, every nation must resist the temptation to solve its own economic problems at the expense of others. We must fashion our domestic policies on the basis of global as well as national needs. Secondly, all nations which bear their fair share of responsibility should benefit from a healthy world economy. And, thirdly, all nations must enter international economic negotiations in a spirit of accommodation.
123.	These principles will not by themselves solve the problems we face. But without their general acceptance, there can be no genuine progress. Adherence to them will prevent critical negotiations from turning into polarizing and self-defeating tests of will.
124.	Let me discuss several major issues where the application of these principles can make the difference between success and failure.
125.	First I shall speak of the 'Committee of the Whole' that is, the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174. One of our most recent collective efforts to address the economic challenges we share was the establishment of that Committee. The Committee has the potential to look at economic issues comprehensively and to identify longer-term priorities. The United States strongly supports that forum. At its meeting in May it made progress in identifying some important areas of agreement between the industrial and the developing countries. Substantive discussions in the Committee had an important impact on the Ministerial Meeting of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, held on 14 and 15 June, and on the Bonn Economic Summit Conference. We of course shared the disappointment of other representatives that a procedural impasse earlier this month interrupted the Committee's work.
126.	Since the September meeting, we have carefully examined the statements made by others on this issue. We have noted in particular statements made by the Chairman to the Committee on 8 September and to the press on 11 September, and have taken into account subsequent consultations. It is now generally agreed that the Committee would not seek to provide specific solutions to problems outstanding in other bodies. Rather, it would achieve agreed conclusions on fundamental or crucial underlying issues, and only to the extent that all members agreed to decide on them.
127.	We are satisfied that on the basis of these statements sufficient procedural agreement now exists to resume substantive work in the manner suggested by the Chairman at the end of the informal consultations on 6 September [see A[33/34, part two, annex A].
128.	I turn now to the question of trade. The spirit which must guide our work in the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 applies as well to our policies on trade. The developing world is no longer on the periphery of world trade. Increasingly, growth in the developing countries is important to the health of the industrial countries.
129.	Commitment to open trade, however, is extremely fragile. It is tempting for one nation to use trade restrictions to export its economic difficulties. It is often easy to avoid adjustments which are beneficial in the long run, but which in the short run present difficult problems for workers and for industry.
130.	We must be concerned about rising protectionist pressures, but we should also recognize that world trade has expanded remarkably well in recent; years. Despite a deep recession in the early 1970s, we not only avoided the trading wars of the 1930s, but we continued negotiations to liberalize and to improve the world trading system. Our ability to conclude these trade negotiations successfully this year is a critical test of our commitment to an open trading system. An agreement will stimulate production, it will provide jobs, and it will help reduce inflation.
131.	Beyond our efforts to expand trade, the United States will fulfil our commitment to assist developing nations through differential measures, including, where appropriate, special and more favourable treatment. We, in turn, expect those developing countries which can do so to contribute to trade liberalization by improving access to their markets. Improved access will not only benefit the industrial countries; it will be even more important to many developing countries.
132.	Finally, we believe that in trade, as elsewhere, the developing countries should have a voice in determining the policies which affect them. We have encouraged their full involvement in the Geneva multilateral trade negotiations. We urge developing countries, especially those which play a large role in international trade, to participate actively in
GATT and in the agreements that result from the Geneva negotiations so that their interests are fully represented.
133.	I turn now to the question of commodities. An essential element of trade for most developing nations is their export of basic commodities. At the fourth session of UNCTAD we agreed to intensify our collective effort to address commodity problems. Progress has not always been as fast as we all would like, but this has generally reflected the technical complexity of commodity issues rather than the lack of political will or good faith. We will continue to work for stabilization agreements and other measures that strengthen commodity markets.
134.	Let me affirm that we believe a soundly designed common fund could play a useful role in alleviating commodity problems. A well-structured fund will provide economic benefits to participating countries. We also recognize that the establishment of a fund is of major political importance to the general North-South dialogue.
135.	We will co-operate with others to bring the common fund negotiations to a successful conclusion. Recent consultations have identified a convergence of views on some issues. All agree that a fund could play a useful role in reducing the over-all financial costs of supporting buffer stocks, which effectively stabilize prices.
136.	In addition, there is a growing recognition of the importance of encouraging improved productivity and more effective marketing of many commodities. A separate 'second window' of the common fund, based on voluntary contributions and operating under agreed guidelines, might be an appropriate mechanism. We are-prepared to negotiate flexibly on this issue, as on others, if there is a similar approach on all sides.
137.	While progress has been made on some issues, important differences still remain. Movement on all sides of the conference table will be necessary. But we are convinced that with mutual accommodation a workable agreement can be achieved.
138.	As with trade, increased resource flows to the developing world must be part of an international system of shared responsibility.
139.	We ought not to think of resource transfers as a sacrifice for donors or a unilateral benefit for recipients They are an economic investment in the future of all countries. They will contribute to global economic growth, greater trade and enhanced prosperity for us all.
140.	My country is committed to increasing our contributions to both multilateral and bilateral development efforts. We have' done so in the past year: our multilateral commitments increased by 31 per cent and our bilateral programme expanded by 20 per cent. And, because we are determined that United States aid funds will be used effectively, we will concentrate our efforts in countries where programmes are aimed most directly at meeting the essential needs of their people.
141.	The United States believes strongly that a key objective of foreign assistance should be to help meet basic human needs. We recognize that nations will have different development priorities in approaching this goal. Whether emphasis is on enhancing the productivity of the poor, increasing food production, improving health or expanding industry which creates jobs, the critical ingredient in every nation is to have all its citizens—men and women—as active participants in and beneficiaries of their nation's growth.
142.	Finally, we recognize the debt problems that many of the least developed countries face. We will soon have authority from our Congress for retroactive adjustment of certain aid terms which would permit us to help those most in need.
143.	As we work together to promote economic development, we must also ensure an equitable sharing of the world's resources. Four issues demand our immediate attention. Our first urgent priority is ensuring adequate food and stable agricultural prices for all people. Four years have now passed since the World Food Conference, where we agreed on measures we must take for the future.5 But despite our efforts the fundamental problems remain: food production is hardly keeping pace with the growth in population; food deficits in many countries are increasing; and negotiations on grain reserves have dragged on without success. We believe progress must be made.
144.	The United States has created a 9-million-ton farmer-held grain reserve. We have proposed to our Congress the establishment of an international emergency wheat reserve of 6 million tons to provide food for emergency needs in developing countries. We intend to maintain our food aid level at a fair share of the target set at the World Food Conference.
145.	We will continue to support the activities of international organizations devoted to food production such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development. And we intend to make food aid a more effective tool in support of development.
146.	I propose that this Assembly review the world food situation to identify the current obstacles to progress and to restore a sense of urgency in meeting mankind's most basic need. We must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests. Another tragedy is inevitable unless we act now.
147.	Secondly, we must act now to develop new energy resources so that we may avoid a harsh transition to the time when fossil fuels will no longer be plentiful. This task has several dimensions.
148.	There must be an expansion of oil and gas production, and we need to improve our conservation of these energy resources, especially in my country, the United States. The World Bank has expanded its lending to help developing countries increase their fossil fuel supplies. We welcome this, and we also encourage the regional development banks to assist.

149.	The development of nuclear energy will also be central to the future of many countries. We hope the' International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will provide a consensus on nuclear technologies free from the serious risk of nuclear-weapon proliferation. My Government supports the development of safeguardable nuclear power, including assured nuclear fuel supplies. The developing nations should, of course, participate in the design and management of the institutions which form the basis of an international nuclear energy regime.
150.	Priority attention must be given to the development of renewable energy resources. Many technologies already exist for harnessing solar, wind and geothermal power. All of us can benefit from these technologies, but a special effort should be made to meet the needs of the poorer countries.
151.	Two opportunities now exist for the United Nations to continue to play an important role. The United States supports the proposed United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy.  Such a conference could result in a more co-ordinated United Nations energy effort and clearer priorities. It could also provide up-to-date information on renewable energy technology, and examine the role of the private sector in energy development. UNDP might also expand its efforts to help nations assess their own renewable energy possibilities, finance the testing of new technologies and provide training and technical assistance for effective energy management.
152.	The United States is willing to contribute to a major global effort to develop new energy resources. We will intensify our assistance programmes in this area. We will increase domestic research, which can benefit all nations. And we will expand co-operative energy programmes from which we, too, stand to benefit.
153.	Thirdly, we must strive to conclude successfully the negotiations on the law of the sea. At stake is whether that vast expanse of the globe will be an arena of conflict or of co-operation. Considerable progress has been made on a number of issues in these negotiations. These achievements have been obscured, however, by continued stalemate over sea-bed mining. The basis for an equitable solution already exists and is widely accepted. It permits all sides to benefit fully from sea-bed mining, with- private firms as well as an international enterprise being allowed to mine on a competitive basis. A mutually acceptable solution is imperative, and it is, we believe, possible. Time is running out for reaching an agreed solution. Without it, sea-bed mining will inevitably take place, but in the absence of an international agreed framework. That would be less satisfactory than a widely supported international regime.
154.	Fourthly, and finally, there is the critical question of how best to harness technology and science for the benefit of mankind. We hope that the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, to be held next year in Vienna, will focus attention on how all countries can contribute their knowledge to global development. It will be particularly important to find ways for developing nations to enhance their capacity to generate, select and apply technology for their own development priorities. We will contribute to the work of the Conference, and we hope to benefit from it.
155.	Furthermore, to help mobilize the technical talents and knowledge of our nation on behalf of the development of others, we intend to establish during the coming year a new foundation for international technical co-operation.
156.	The ultimate purpose of all our policies is the enhancement of human dignity. The rights to food, to shelter, to a decent education, to adequate health—the' rights which lie at the heart of our approach to economic issues—are hollow without political and civil freedoms: freedom from torture and government mistreatment, freedom to worship, to travel and to speak without fear, freedom to participate in the affairs of one's Government. There is no incompatibility among economic, political and civil rights; no choice that must be made among them. They reinforce one another.
157.	We commemorate in this Assembly the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Dag Hammarskjold described the Declaration as a living document. We have a continuing obligation to keep that document alive in our own nations. And as Members of the United Nations we must strengthen the international machinery that serves to promote the full range of human rights, including political and economic rights.
158.	We have made significant progress in the past year. Concern for human rights is more central to international discourse today than ever before. But more needs to be done. This Assembly should review the activities of the various United Nations human rights institutions. We must resolve in this Assembly to make torture alien to the experience of every nation and to conclude an international agreement to outlaw it. We need to ensure that we are doing all we can to end conditions which are tantamount to genocide. And we must ask what more each of us can do to ensure the vitality of the Universal Declaration, to provide amnesty to prisoners of conscience, to ensure due process for all and to advance social justice and equity for our people.
159.	In addition, the plight of one group of individuals, refugees, demands our special compassion. We urge all nations to increase their support for the vital humanitarian work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
160.	The refugee problem is not confined to any single region. In Africa alone, some 2 million individuals are now outside their native lands. We must do more to offer them sustenance, security and a realistic hope of resettlement or return to their homelands.
161.	In South-East Asia hundreds of new refugees from Indo-China appear daily, some risking their lives to cross borders, others challenging the sea in every form of vessel. We urgently need greater efforts to provide them with sanctuary. We hope that the High Commissioner will consider convening an international conference in the very near future to seek humane solutions to the desperate plight of these refugees.
162.	We propose that consideration also be given at a later date to a general conference on the world-wide refugee problem.
163.	Let me now turn to international peace-keeping. Too often the anguish of the uprooted is grim testimony to our collective failure to achieve international peace. War and strife are the enemies of the fundamental rights I have discussed. Today my Government and many of those assembled here are actively pursuing the path of peace in troubled areas of the world.
164.	The accords achieved at Camp David  offer hope that at long last a turning-point has been reached in the Middle East. The agreements achieved between Egypt and Israel, with active American participation, constitute a framework for a comprehensive peace settlement. Much remains to be done in the ensuing stages of negotiations, but a major step has been taken in resolving the difficult issues that lie at the heart of 30 years of Arab-Israel hostility. As negotiations are pursued on the basis of the Camp David framework a dynamic process will be set in motion that can profoundly change attitudes on the issues that remain to be resolved. That process will significantly advance legitimate Arab objectives while protecting Israel's security. It is our hope that the Members of this body will lend their full support to the task of building a just and lasting peace upon this framework.
165.	In his address before Congress on 18 September  President Carter reviewed the main elements of the Camp David agreements. As the President said, our historic position on settlements in occupied territory has remained constant. As he further said, no peace agreement will be either just or secure if it does not 'resolve the problem of the Palestinians in the broadest sense. We believe that the Palestinian people must be assured that they and their descendants can live with dignity and freedom and have the opportunity for economic fulfilment and political expression. The Camp David accords state that the negotiated solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
166.	The Camp David accords make a solid start towards achieving these goals for the Palestinians in real terms. In the West Bank and Gaza, the framework provides that Israeli occupation shall end and a self-governing authority shall be instituted. This can be achieved within a few months. Thus, for the first time the Palestinians have the prospect of governing themselves within the framework that has been agreed.
167.	The Camp David framework also gives the Palestinians a vital role in shaping their destiny by recognizing them as participants in all aspects of the negotiations that determine their future. The Palestinians will participate in the negotiations to set up their self-governing authority, in those to determine the final status of the West Bank and ' Gaza, and in those leading to a Jordan-Israel peace treaty. Finally, the agreement on the final status of the West Bank
and Gaza will be submitted to a vote of representatives of the inhabitants for either ratification or rejection. These steps set in motion a political process of the utmost importance to all Palestinians.
168.	The Camp David accords concentrate on the means by which self-government can be established for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza, but there was also clear recognition by all three leaders at Camp David that the problem of the Palestinians living outside these areas must also be addressed. We recognize that this problem has political as well as humanitarian dimensions which must be resolved as an integral part of a durable peace settlement. When the Camp David accords call for the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, they acknowledge and embrace that central fact. As the political institutions of self-government take shape, West Bank and Gaza through negotiations among parties, the relationship between those institutions and the Palestinians living outside the area should be defined, including the question of admission of Palestinian refugees to the West Bank and Gaza.
169.	The framework provides for the establishment of a committee to decide on the modalities of admission to the West Bank and Gaza of persons displaced in the 1967 war. For the first time the parties to the conflict, Egypt and Israel, have agreed to work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent resolution of the refugee problem.
170.	As President Carter stated in his address to Congress, the United States is irrevocably committed to bringing about a satisfactory solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees. We will play an active role in the resolution of this problem. A solution must reflect the relevant United Nations resolutions relating to the refugees. We urge the international community to support Egypt and Israel in establishing procedures urgently to address this issue in all its aspects. And the international community should contribute to a programme to promote economic development in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as to assist those refugees residing elsewhere.
171. We are determined to achieve a fair and just
settlement of the Middle East question in all its parts, and
we hope the Palestinian people will seize this historic
opportunity. It is our hope that the people of the Middle
East will agree that it is imperative to begin the negotiating
process now and not to stand still until every last issue is
resolved. We urge the other interested parties to join the
negotiations without delay.
172. As the Middle East peace process moves forward, it is
vital to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
peace-keeping role there. It is critical that the mandates of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Forces in the Golan
Heights [UNDOF] and Sinai [UNEF] be renewed this fall.
Those Forces have thus far helped all sides avoid renewed
hostilities; they must now remain to help achieve a stable
peace.
173. Let me briefly review several other regional disputes
of major importance. 
174. In Lebanon, the fighting and tragic loss of life
continue. UNIFIL in southern Lebanon has done much to
stabilize the situation in that part of the country, and we
call on all to support this effort to help reassert Lebanese
authority. Elsewhere in Lebanon confrontation and tensions
continue at a high pitch. President Carter made clear
in his address to the joint session of Congress following the
Camp David summit meetings, and again yesterday, his
determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a
solution to the Lebanese tragedy. As the President said
yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call a
conference of those who are involved and to try to reach
some solution. It may involve a new charter for Lebanon.
175. In Namibia the world community faces a fundamental
challenge. I will be commenting on this more
fully this afternoon in the Security Council. Let me
simply say now that 'the United States is determined to see
Namibia achieve independence in accordance with the
contact group proposal and Security Council resolution
431 (1978). We call upon South Africa to co-operate fully
with the United Nations so that this critical opportunity for
a peaceful settlement will not be lost.
176. In Rhodesia, time may be running out for the
possibilities of diplomacy. But we will continue to work
with the United Kingdom Government, the Governments in
the region and the parties to seek a negotiated solution, We
condemn the murder of innocent civilians as a matter of
both conscience and reason. The prospects for peace in
Rhodesia will diminish if violence increases.
177. On Cyprus, an opportunity now exists to help the
two communities narrow their differences and achieve a
just and lasting solution to this long-standing problem. The
United Nations has done a commendable job of nurturing
an atmosphere which should now make possible productive
intercommunal negotiations. To grasp this opportunity, we
would welcome and. actively support a renewed effort by
Secretary-General Waldheim to help the parties reach
agreement on a sovereign, bicommunal, non-aligned federal
Republic of Cyprus which would meet the concerns of the
people of Cyprus.
178. In this Hemisphere, we must respond to the agony of
those caught up in the violence and bloodshed of
Nicaragua. We and several countries in Latin America have
offered to assist in the mediation of Nicaragua's internal
crisis. It is our hope and expectation that all parties
concerned will accept these offers and 'agree to a fair
mediation process in which all can have confidence. Only a
democratic solution in Nicaragua-not repression or
.violence-can lead to an enduring stability and to true
peace.
179. As we work together to find peaceful resolutions to
the most dangerous regional disputes, we must also seek in
this Assembly to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capability.

180. And while this Organization works to limit violence
among nations, we must not lose sight of the havoc
wreaked by those who perpetrate terrorist acts on innocent
persons. No sin(;k' nation, acting alone, can deal adequately
with this serious problem. Collective action is essential.



181.	We are beginning to make some progress. Last year the General Assembly adopted a significant resolution on aircraft hijacking resolution 32/8. The Joint Statement on International Terrorism adopted on 17 July 1978 at the Bonn Economic Summit Conference  produced a much needed agreement on the harbouring of hijackers. We strongly urge all nations to subscribe to this Statement.
182.	The pursuit of peace and security must go beyond resolving conflicts and preventing violence. The security of all is enhanced if nations limit the weapons of war through mutually negotiated arms control agreements.
183.	We are engaged with the Soviet Union and other nations in a broad range of arms control negotiations.
184.	The conclusion of a strategic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union is a fundamental goal of the United States. We hope that we may conclude an agreement as a result of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks before the end of this year.
185.	The United States hopes that early progress can be made in concluding a comprehensive agreement to end the testing of nuclear weapons.
186.	Increased efforts are critically needed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It is important to prepare fully for the 1980 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; to continue to make progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation; and to recognize one of the important achievements of the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament: the decision by several nuclear Powers to pledge, under specific circumstances, to refrain from use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. We suggest that the Security Council take note of these pledges.
187.	The United States will also work to ensure compliance with the call in the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the special session on disarmament [see resolution S-10/2] for restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. We are actively discussing with the Soviet Union how our two nations might encourage restraint in consistency with the legitimate right to self-defence and international obligations. We are encouraged by the new initiatives already being taken to promote restraint on a regional basis in Latin America and we stand ready to support similar efforts by countries in other regions.
188.	In conclusion, let me emphasize that on all the issues I have addressed today what we share is greater than how we differ. We share the same small planet. We share human aspirations—for better lives, for greater opportunity, for freedom and security. And because we share a common destiny, we are compelled to resolve our differences.
189.	If we focus on these common interests, we can begin to find the common ground for global progress. We can, as Jean Monnet said, 'put our problems on one side of the table and all of us on the other'.
190.	The measure of our progress will not be whether we achieve all our goals in this generation, for that will surely not be possible. It is whether we can now summon the will to move forward together so that our children may benefit from our efforts and our vision.











﻿
Half a world away from this place of peace, the firing, the killing, the bloodshed in two merciless conflicts have for the first time in recent memory diminished. After terrible new names, names such as Halabja, Maidan Shahr and Spin Buldak, have been added to the toll-call of human horror, there is today hope of peace in the Persian Gulf and Afghanistan.
So too, in the highlands and coastal cities of southern Africa, places of civil war, places of occupation by foreign troops, talk of peace is heard, peace for the tortured nation of Angola. Sixty-five hundred miles east, in the South-East Asian country of Cambodia, there is hope now of a settlement and the removal of Viet Nam's occupying forces. Finally, in this hemisphere, where only 12 years ago one third of the people of Latin America lived under democratic rule, some 90 per cent do so today. And especially in Central America, nations such as El Salvador, once threatened by the anarchy of the death squad and the spectre of totalitarian rule, now know the hope of self-government and the prospect of economic growth. 
Another change, a change that if it endures may go down as one of the signal accomplishments of our history, a change that is cause for shaking the head in wonder, is also upon us; a change going to the source of post-war tensions and to the once seemingly impossible dream of ending the twin threats of our time - totalitarianism and thermonuclear world war.
For the first time, the differences between East and West - fundamental differences over important moral questions dealing with the worth of the individual and whether Governments shall control people or people control Governments - for the first time these differences have shown signs of easing, easing to the point where there are not just troop withdrawals from places such as Afghanistan, but also talk in the East of reform and greater freedom of the press, of assembly and of religion. Yes, fundamental differences remain, but should talk of reform become more than that, should it become reality, there is the prospect of not only a new era in Soviet-United States relations but a new age of world peace; for such reform can bring peace. History teaches, and my country has always believed that, where the rights of the individual and the people are enshrined, war is a distant prospect. For it is not people who make war; only Governments do that.
I stand at this rostrum, then, at a moment of hope; hope not just for the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union, but for all the peoples of the world, and hope too for the dream of peace among nations, the dream that began the United Nations. Precisely because of these changes, today the United Nations has the opportunity to live and breathe and work as never before.
Already, Mr. Secretary-General, you, through your persistence, patience and unyielding will, have shown in working towards peace in Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf how valuable the United Nations can be. We salute you for these accomplishments. In Geneva at this very hour there are numerous negotiations under way: multilateral negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament, as well as bilateral negotiations on a range of issues between the Soviets and ourselves. These negotiations, some of them under United Nations auspices, involve a broad arms-control agenda: strategic offensive weapons, strategic defence and space, nuclear testing, and chemical warfare - whose urgency we have witnessed anew in recent days.
And the negotiators ate busy. Over the last few years they h iv/e been engaged in more than an academic exercise. There is movement; the log-jam is broken. Only recently, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) agreement, an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear missiles was eliminated for the first time in history. Progress continues on negotiations to reduce strategic weapons in massive number, with effective verification, and talks will begin soon on conventional reductions in Europe.
Much of the reason for all this goes back, I believe, to Geneva, to the small chateau beside the lake where I and the Soviet General Secretary had the first of several fireside chats - exchanges characterized by frankness, but friendliness too. I said at the first meeting in Geneva that this was a unique encounter between two people who had the power to start a third world war or to begin a new age of peace among nations. I also said that peace conferences, arms negotiations and proposals for treaties could make sense only if they were part of a wider context, a context in which we sought to explore and resolve the deeper underlying differences between us. I said to Mr. Gorbachev then, as I have said to the Assembly before, that nations do not mistrust each other because they are armed; they are armed because they mistrust each other. 

In that place, by that peaceful lake in neutral Switzerland, Mr. Gorbachev and I did begin a new relationship based not just on engagement over the single issue of arras control but on a broader agenda about our deeper differences, an agenda of human rights, regional conflicts and bilateral exchanges between our peoples. Even on the arms-control issue itself we agreed to go beyond the past, to seek not just treaties that permitted building weapons to higher levels, but revolutionary agreements that actually reduced and even eliminated a whole class of nuclear weapons.
What was begun that morning in Geneva has shown results: in the INF Treaty? in my recent visit to Moscow; in my opportunity to meet there with Soviet citizens and dissidents and speak of human rights; and to speak too, in the Lenin Hills of Moscow, to the young people of the Soviet Union about the wonder and splendour of human freedom. The results of that morning in Geneva are seen in peace conferences now under way around the world on regional conflicts and in the work of the United Nations here in New York as well as in Geneva.
But history teaches caution. Indeed, that very building in Geneva, where important negotiations have taken place - those on the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan, and the Iran-Iraq negotiations, for example - we see today as stone-like testimony to a failed dream of peace in another time. The Palais des Nations was the headquarters of the League of Nations, an institution that was to symbolize an end to all war. Yet that institution and its noble purpose ended with the Second World War; ended because the chance of peace was not seized in the 1930s by the nations of the world, ended because humanity did not find the courage to isolate the aggressors, to reject schemes of government that served the State, not the people. We are here today determined that no such fate shall befall the United Nations. We are determined that the United Nations shall succeed and serve the cause of peace for humankind.
So we realize that, even in this time of hope, the chance of failure is teal, but this knowledge does not discourage us: it spurs us on. For the stakes are high; do we falter and fail now, and bring down upon ourselves the just anger of future generations? Or do we continue the work of the founders of this institution, and see to it that, at last, freedom is enshrined and humanity knows war no longer, and that this place, this floor, shall be truly 'the world's last battlefield'?
We are determined that it shall be so. So we turn now to the agenda of peace. Let us begin by addressing a concern that was much on my mind when I met with Mr. Gorbachev in the Kremlin as well as on the minds of Soviet citizens I met in Moscow. It is also an issue that I know is of immediate importance to the members of this Assembly who, this fall, commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
That Declaration says plainly what those who seek peace can forget only at the greatest peril that peace rests on one foundation; observance of the 'inalienable rights of all members of the human family'. In a century where human rights have been denied by totalitarian governments on a scale never before seen in history, with so many millions deliberately starved or eliminated as a matter of State policy - a history, it has been said, of blood, stupidity and barbed wire - few can wonder why peace has proved so elusive.	
Well, let us understand. If we would have peace, we must acknowledge the elementary rights of our fellow human beings, in our own land and in other lands. If we would have peace, the trampling of the human spirit must cease. Human rights is not for some, some of the time. Human rights, as the Universal Declaration adopted by this Assembly in 1948 proclaims, is 'for all peoples and all nations'. And for all time.
This regard for human rights as the foundation of peace is at the heart of the United Nations. Those who starve in Ethiopia, those who die among the Kurds, those who face racial injustice in South Africa, those who still cannot write or speak freely in the Soviet Union, those who cannot worship in the Ukraine, those who struggle for life and freedom on boats in the South China Sea, those who cannot publish or assemble in Managua - all of these are more than just an item on your agenda. It must be a first concern, an issue above others. For when human rights concerns are not paramount at the United Nations - when the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not honoured in these halls and meeting rooms - then the very credibility of this Organization is at stake, the very purpose of its existence in question.
That is why, when progress is made in human rights, the United Nations grows stronger and the United States is glad of it. For example, following a two-year ¡ effort led by the United States, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights took a major step towards ending the double standards and cynicism that had characterized too much of its past. For years, Cuba, a blatant violator of its citizens' human rights, has escaped United Nations censure or even scrutiny. This year, Cuba has responded to pressure generated by the Commission on Human Rights by accepting an investigation into its human rights abuses. Fidel Castro has already begun to free some political prisoners, improve prison conditions, and tolerate the existence of a small, independent national human rights group.
More must be done. The United Nations must be relentless and unyielding in seeking change, in Cuba and elsewhere. And we must also see to it that the Universal Declaration itself is not debased with episodes like the resolution 'Zionism is racism'. Respect for human rights is the first and fundamental mission of this body, the most elementary obligation of its members. Indeed, wherever one turns in the world today, there is a new awareness, a growing passion for human rights. The people of the world become united: new groups, new coalitions form, coalitions that commit: government, that work against discrimination, that fight religious or political repression, unlawful imprisonment, torture or execution. As those I spoke to at Spaso House said to me last June: Such movements make a difference.
Turning now to regional conflicts, we feel again the uplift of hope. In the Gulf War between Iran and Iraq - one of the bloodiest conflicts since the Second World War - we have a cease-fire. The resolution and the firmness of the allied nations in keeping the Persian Gulf open to international shipping not only upheld the rule of law, it helped prevent further spread of the conflict and laid the basis for peace. So, too, the Security Council's decisive resolution in July a year ago has become the blueprint for a peaceful Gulf. Let this war - a war in which there has been no victor or vanquished, only victims - let this war end now. Let both Iran and Iraq co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security Council in implementing resolution 598 (1978). Let peace come.
Moving on to a second region, I would recall that when I first addressed the United Nations General Assembly in 1983, world attention was focused on the brutal invasion and illegal occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly nine long years of war, the courage and determination of the Afghan people and the Afghan freedom fighters have held sway - and today, an end to the occupation is in sight. On April 14, the USSR signed the Geneva Accords, which were negotiated under United Nations auspices by Pakistan and the Kabul regime. We encourage the Soviet Union to complete its troop withdrawal at the earliest possible date, so that the Afghan people can freely determine their future without further outside interference.
In southern Africa, too, years of patient diplomacy and support for those in Angola who seek self-determination are having their effect. We look forward to an accord between the Governments of Angola, Cuba, and South Africa that will bring about a complete withdrawal of all foreign troops - primarily Cuban - from Angola. We look forward as well to full implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and our longstanding goal of independence for Namibia. We continue to support a growing consensus among African leaders who also believe there can be no end to conflict in the region until there is national reconciliation within Angola.
There are new hopes for Cambodia, a nation whose freedom and independence we seek just as avidly as we sought the freedom and independence of Afghanistan. We urge the rapid removal of all Vietnamese troops and a settlement that will prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge to power, permitting instead the establishment of a genuinely representative government - a government that will, at last, respect fully the rights of the people of Cambodia and end the hideous suffering they have so bravely and needlessly borne.
In other critical areas, we applaud the Secretary-General's efforts to structure a referendum on the Western Sahara. In the Mediterranean, direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriot common ties hold much promise for accord in that divided island nation. Finally, we look to a peaceful solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. So, too, the unnatural division of Europe remains a critical obstacle to Soviet-American relations. 
In most of these areas, then, we see progress and, again, we are glad of it. Only a few years ago, all of these and other conflicts were burning dangerously out of control. Indeed, the invasion of Afghanistan and the apparent failure of will among democratic and peace-loving nations to deter such events seemed to cause a climate where aggression by nations large and small was epidemic, a climate the world had not seen since the 1930s. Only this time, larger war was avoided - avoided because the free and peaceful nations of the world recovered their strength of purpose and will. And now the United Nations is providing valuable assistance in helping this epidemic to recede.
And because we are resolved to keep it so, I would be remiss in my duty if I did not now take note here of the one exception to progress in regional conflicts. I refer here to the continuing deterioration of human rights in Nicaragua and the refusal of the tiny elite now ruling that nation to honour promises of democracy made to their own people and to the international community. This elite - in calling itself revolutionary - seeks no real revolution; the use of the term is subterfuge, deception for hiding the oldest, most corrupt vice of alls man's age-old will to power, his lust to control the lives and steal the freedom of others.
That is why, as President, I will continue to urge the Congress and the American public to stand behind those who resist this attempt to impose a totalitarian regime on the people of Nicaragua; that the United States will continue to stand with those who are threatened by this regime's aggression against its neighbours in Central America.
Today, I also call on the Soviet Union to show in Central America the same spirit of constructive realism it has shown in other regional conflicts; to assist in bringing conflict in Central America to a close by halting the flow of billions of dollars worth of arms and ammunition to the Sandinista regime; a regime whose goals of regional domination, while ultimately doomed, can continue to cause great suffering to the people of that area and risk to Soviet-American relations unless action is taken now.
With regard to the arms reduction agenda, I have already mentioned the importance of the INF Treaty and the momentum developed in the strategic arms reduction talks (START). The draft START treaty is a lengthy process filled with bracketed language designating sections of disagreement between the two sides. But through this summer in Geneva, those brackets have diminished; there is every reason to believe this process can continue. I can tell this Assembly that it is highly doubtful such a treaty can be accomplished in a few months, but I can tell you that a year from now is a possibility - more than a possibility. But we have no deadline. No agreement is better than a bad agreement. The United States remains hopeful, and we acknowledge the spirit of co-operation shown by the Soviet Union in these negotiations. We also look for that spirit to be applied to our concerns about compliance with existing agreements.
So, too, our discussions on nuclear testing and defence and space have been useful. But let me here stress to the General Assembly that much of the momentum in nuclear-arms-control negotiations is due to technological progress itself, especially in the potential for space-based defensive systems. I believe that the determination of the United States to research and develop and, when ready, deploy such defensive systems - systems targeted to destroy missiles, not people - accounts for a large share of the progress made in recent years in Geneva. With such systems, for the first time, in case of accidental launch or the act of a madman somewhere, major Powers will not be faced with the single option of massive retaliation, but will instead have the chance of a saner choice: to shield against an attack instead of avenging it. So, too, as defensive systems grow in effectiveness, they reduce the threat and the value of greater and greater offensive arsenals. Only recently, briefings I have received in the Oval Office indicate that progress toward such systems may be even more rapid and less costly than we had at first thought. Today, the United States reaffirms its commitment to its strategic defence initiative and our offer to share the benefits of strategic defences with others.
And yet, even as diplomatic and technological progress holds out the hope of at last diminishing the awful cloud of nuclear terror we have lived under in the post-war era, even at this moment another ominous terror is loose once again in the world, a terror we thought the world had put behind, a terror that looms at us now from the long-buried past, from ghostly, scarring trenches and the haunting, wan faces of millions dead in one of the most inhumane conflicts of all time.
Poison gas; chemical warfare: the terror of it; the horror of it! We condemn it. The use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, beyond its tragic human toll, jeopardizes the moral and legal strictures that have held those weapons in check since the First World War. Let this tragedy spark reaffirmation of the Geneva Protocol outlawing the use of chemical weapons. I call upon the signatories to that Protocol, as well as other concerned States, to convene a conference to consider actions that we can take together to reverse the serious erosion of this treaty. We urge all nations to co-operate in negotiating a verifiable, truly global ban on chemical weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
It is incumbent upon all civilized nations to ban, once and for all - and on a verifiable and global basis - the use of chemical and gas warfare.
Finally, we must redouble our efforts to stop further proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. Likewise, proliferation in other high-technology weapons such as ballistic missiles, is reaching global proportions, exacerbating regional rivalries in ways that can have global implications. The number of potential suppliers is growing at an alarming rate, and more must be done to halt the spread of these weapons. This was a matter of discussion last week between Secretary Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. Talks between American and Soviet experts begin on this today; and we hope to see a multilateral effort to avoid having areas of tension like the Middle East becoming even more deadly battlegrounds than they already are.
Rut in most of these areas we see not only progress but also the potential for an increasingly vital role for multilateral efforts and institutions like the United Nations. That is why now more than ever the United Nations must continue to increase its effectiveness through budget and programme reform. The United Nations already is enacting sweeping measures affecting personnel reductions, budgeting by consensus, and the establishment of programme priorities. These actions are extremely important. The progress on reforms has allowed me to release funds withheld under congressional restrictions. I expect that the reform programme will continue and that further funds will be released in our new fiscal year.
Let me say here that we congratulate the United Nations on the work it has done in three areas of special concern. First, our struggle against the scourge of terrorism and State-sponsored terrorism must continue; and we must also end the scourge of hostage-taking. Second, the work of the World Health Organization in co-ordinating and advancing research on AIDS is vital. All international efforts in this area must be redoubled. The AIDS crisis is a grave one; we must move as one to meet it. 
So, too, is the drug crisis. We are moving now toward a new anti-drug-trafficking convention. This important treaty will be completed in December. I am confident that other strong United Nations drug-control programmes will also follow. The American people are profoundly concerned and deeply angered. We will not tolerate the drug traffickers. We mean to make war on them - and we believe this is one war the United Nations can endorse and participate in. Yes, the United Nations is a better place than it was eight years ago - and so, too, is the world. But the real issue of reform in the United Nations is not limited to fiscal and administrative improvements; it includes also a higher sort of reform, an intellectual and philosophical reform, a reform of old views about the relationship between the individual and the State. 
Few developments, for example, have been more encouraging to the United States than the special session on Africa that this body held two and a half years ago - a session at which the Members of the United Nations joined in calling as one for free-market incentives and a lessening of State controls to spur economic development. 
At one of the first international assemblies of my presidency, in Cancun, Mexico, I said that history demonstrates that, time and again, in place after place, economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides in countries that encourage economic freedom; that individual farmers, labourers, owners, traders and managers are the heart and soul of development. Trust them, because where they are allowed to create and build, where they are given a personal stake in deciding economic policies and benefiting from their success, societies become more dynamic, prosperous, progressive and free. We believe in freedom; we know that it works.
This is the immutable lesson of the post-war era: that freedom works; that, even more, freedom and peace work together. Every year that passes, everywhere in the world, this lesson is taking hold - from the People's Republic of China to Cameroon, from Bolivia to Botswana, and, yes, in the citadel of Marxism-Leninism itself. No, my country did not invent this synergy of peace and freedom, but, believe me, we impose no restrictions on the free export of our more than two centuries of experience with it. Free people, blessed by economic opportunity and protected by laws that respect the dignity of the individual, are not driven towards war or the domination of others. Here, then, is the way to world peace. But we Americans champion freedom not only because it is practical and beneficial but because it is also just, morally right.
Here I should like to note that I have addressed this assemblage more often than any of my predecessors and that this is the last occasion on which I shall do so. Therefore I hope that I may be permitted some closing reflections.
The world is currently witnessing another celebration of international co-operation. At the Olympics we see nations joining together in the competition of sports, and we see young people, who know precious little of the resentments of their elders, coming together as one.
One of our young athletes, from a home of modest means, said that she drew the strength for her achievement from another source of wealth. 'We were rich as a family' she said about the love she was given and the values she was taught. I dare to hope that in the sentiment of that young athlete we see a sign of the rediscovery of old and tested values; values such as family - the first and most important unit of society, where all values and learning begin, an institution to be cherished and protected·, values, too, such as work, community, freedom and faith, for it is here we find the deeper rationale for the cause of human rights and world peace.
Our own experience on this continent, the American experience, though brief, has had one unmistakable encounter, an insistence on the preservation of one sacred truth: it is a truth that our first President, our founding father, passed on in the first farewell address made to the American people; it is a truth that I hope you will permit me to mention in these remarks of farewell, a truth embodied in our Declaration of Independence: that the case for inalienable rights, the idea of human dignity, the notion of conscience above compulsion, can be made only in the context of higher law, only in the context of what one of the founders of this Organization, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, called 'devotion to something which is greater and higher than we are ourselves.'
This is the endless cycle, the final truth to which humankind seems always to return - that religion and morality, faith in something higher, are prerequisites for freedom, and that justice and peace within ourselves is the first step toward justice and peace in the world and for the ages.
Yes, this is a place of great debate and grave discussion. Yet I cannot help but note here that one of our founding fathers - the most worldly of men, an internationalist, Benjamin Franklin - interrupted the proceedings of our own constitutional convention to make much the same point.
I cannot help but think this morning of other beginnings - of where and when I first read those words 'and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares' and 'your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams'. This morning, my thoughts go to her who gave me many things in life but whose most important gift was the knowledge of the happiness and solace to be gained in prayer. It is the greatest help I have had in my presidency, and I recall here Lincoln's words when he said
'Only the most foolish of men would think he could confront the duties of the office I now hold without turning to someone stronger, a power above all others. '
I think, then, of her and others like her in that small town in Illinois, gentle people who possessed something that those who hold positions of power sometimes forget to prize. No one of them could ever have imagined that the boy from the banks of the Rock River would come to this moment and have this opportunity. But, had they been told that it would happen, I think they would have been a bit disappointed if I had not spoken here for what they knew so wells that when we grow weary of the world and its troubles, when our faith in humanity falters, it is then that we must seek contort and refreshment of spirit in a deeper source of wisdom, one greater than ourselves.
So, if future generations do say of us that in our time peace came closer, that we did bring about new seasons of truth and justice, it will be cause for pride. But it will be a cause of greater pride still if it is also said that we were wise enough to know that the deliberations of great leaders and great bodies are but an overture, that the truly majestic music, the music of freedom, justice and peace, is the music made in forgetting self and seeking in silence the will of Him who made us.
Thank you for your hospitality over the years. I bid you now farewell, and God bless you.
﻿

Let me first congratulate Mr. Caputo on his election as President of the General Assembly. His wisdom and experience will, I believe, make this a particularly productive session.
It is an honour to be here today speaking to the General Assembly of the United Nations, the crucible of human hope for peace in a troubled world. I believe we are on the brink of a new age, one in which the differences that have divided us are becoming less important than the dangers we must face together. It is a new age in which concrete acts that make our world more secure must and can be matched by tangible commitments to reduce poverty in the developing world and protect our common environment.
For two generations the world has lived in the shadow of nuclear war, but today we meet at a time of significant achievement in arms control.
The Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles is a historic first step in arms reduction for which, I believe, we owe a great debt of gratitude to the courage and leadership of President Reagan of the United States of America and of General Secretary Gorbachev of the Soviet Union. They have laid a foundation, and we can now build upon it.
We must cut strategic weapons. We can limit the spread of nuclear weapons. We can limit nuclear testing, and every step in this direction takes us closer to a comprehensive test ban. We must redouble our efforts to reach a treaty banning chemical weapons.
In this respect, I welcome President Reagan's proposal for an early meeting of the signatories of the Geneva Protocol on the prohibition of chemical weapons. We must also control conventional weapons. Let us not forget that it is in conventional wars that people are still dying today. I encourage this Assembly to provoke and provide even more achievements in the field of disarmament. 
We have also seen progress on regional security issues this past year, progress of which Member nations could only have dreamed in the past.
In Afghanistan, the attempt to impose solutions by invasion and occupation has failed, and the Soviet Union is withdrawing its forces. The United Nations remains heavily involved in the search for solutions. In the Gulf, no country has been able to impose its will by force. Representatives of the United Nations, including 500 Canadians, now patrol in peace where hundreds of thousands recently died in combat.
Canada's role in these events is consistent with our long tradition - more than four decades - of peace-keeping, a role we have always willingly assumed. Canada has participated in every United Nations peace-keeping force since its foundation, and we are proud of this contribution, costly and difficult though it has often been, because we believe it has assisted in bringing stability to explosive regions of the world.
Today a significant portion of our armed forces is either involved in peace-keeping around the world or training for further duty in the service of peace. The award today of the Nobel Peace Prize for peace-keeping is a splendid tribute both to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and to those courageous men and women from all countries who patrol the world's danger spots in the pursuit of a durable peace. May I, on behalf of everyone, offer the Secretary-General our very sincere congratulations.
But not everywhere do we see the progress we would wish. The vicious cycle of repression and violence is unbroken in South Africa. We all know the cause: the massive and institutionalized violation of human rights called apartheid. Internationally, pressure is increasing and is having an impact. The entire world finds apartheid repugnant: the whole world must now join forces to bring it to an end. Canada has taken strong measures on its own to rid our civilization of this unique evil known as apartheid.
We are under no illusions about the effectiveness of our efforts alone, and so we have actively pursued objectives in co-operation with other Governments, especially in the Commonwealth and in Francophonie. From the outset we have applied all the sanctions agreed to within the Commonwealth we will continue to do so and we will seek to broaden their application, increase their effectiveness and encourage others to join in adopting and applying them.
Consistent with our policy of moving systematically and deliberately to increase pressure on South Africa, our Government announced earlier this week specific new measures to tighten the ban on government contracts with South African companies and a further ban on high technology, together with initiatives designed to add practical support to peaceful efforts to work against apartheid. Because of threats to major development projects in the front-line States we intend to provide assistance, in concert with others, to preserve these development initiatives.
The movement in favour of human dignity is now irreversible. There can be no doubt that fundamental change will come to South Africa. The only questions are when and how and at what cost in human life. We must make sure the answers come soon, and peacefully - and that a framework is preserved that will give rise to a non-racial democratic South Africa. Only then will the children of Mandela know the gifts that freedom brings.
The problems of the Middle East have preoccupied this Assembly since the creation of the United Nations. Peaceful solutions have proved elusive, and in their absence violence and extremism have increased. But that is an argument for redoubled effort, not for despair. 
There is today growing support for a properly structured international conference based on Israel's right to exist and recognition of the rights of Palestinians. Canada believes that such a conference can provide a path towards dialogue and away from a situation that appears to promise little but further suffering.
Some regional conflicts continue to challenge our courage and imagination; but, in just a short period of time, progress towards a more peaceful world has been dramatic and deeply encouraging. Who would have predicted a year ago that today Soviet forces would be withdrawing from Afghanistan; that Vietnamese forces would begin withdrawing from Cambodia; that United Nations peace-keepers would be patrolling the Iran-Iraq border; that negotiations on Angola and on Western Sahara would be starting to beat fruit; that the Secretary-General would be discussing the independence of Namibia with the South African Government? 
Those who have doubted both the value of multilateralism and the United Nations surely must be reassessing their views today. The Secretary-General's recent report on the work of this Organization is a document which should inspire the deliberations of this Assembly.
In this dawning hope for peace, the path we ought to take is clear. It is towards conciliation and not confrontation between East and West. It is towards co-operation and generosity, not recrimination and rigidity, in North-South relations. It is towards negotiation, not warfare, in regional disputes. It is towards implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted 40 years ago.
We must give hope to those who today find their rights to free expression silenced by gunfire. We must provide sustenance to the flame of liberty in all regions where fundamental rights are being abused. He roust reinforce the role of the Security Council in the pursuit of peacemaking and peace-keeping around the world. It can be done, but only with the help of everyone in this Assembly.
For many generations the arms race, regional disputes and the threat of nuclear annihilation have been a central preoccupation of the United Nations, and so they will remain. But I believe that we are at a point in history when we must devote significantly more political energy to problems other than security, problems perhaps just as important but until now accorded a somewhat lower priority.
I want to speak specifically about the twin challenges of severe poverty and our endangered environment. I believe we shall not have true security until these problems have been successfully resolved. These issues were high on the agendas of the summit meetings chaired last year by Canada - from the Commonwealth and la Francophonie to the Economic Summit Meeting in Toronto, at these meetings I found a growing conviction among national leaders that these problems can and must be tackled, and must be dealt with before, the end of this century. These problems command the same priority here in the United Nations.
Poverty undermines security. It compromises equality. It denies hope. Today it is estimated that at least one billion people live in absolute poverty. They are hungry. They ate often sick. They are uneducated. They die young.
Alleviating poverty must be given a new priority on national and international agendas. We must work to achieve social justice for the poorer t of our world and economic growth which does not destroy our magnificent environment.
At Toronto the leaders of the major industrialized countries renewed their commitment to work towards continued growth for the benefit of both the industrialized and, particularly, the developing countries. We are also working towards a trading system which is more open and more beneficial to all nations. I believe it will be strengthened bilaterally, as In the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement, the largest commercial agreement in the history of two-way trade. It can also be strengthened regionally, as in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and in Europe as 1992 approaches.
It must be strengthened, too, through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and multilateral talks such as the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations. Progress in those talks is essential at the GATT mid-term review to be held in Montreal this December.
Increased development assistance, especially to the poorest countries, is another imperative. Canada has just completed a review of its official development assistance policy. We have reset our bearings to improve the quality and increase the quantity of the help we give, to recognize the special role of women in development and to concentrate on the poorest people in the poorest countries.
That is why Canada has completely written off the official development assistance debts of a large number of countries. It is surely reasonable that loans given for development purposes should not be allowed to become hindrances to that same development. None of this is altruism. All countries North and South, rich and poor, have an equal stake in a world in which wealth must be more equitably shared. That is why out assistance programme is now composed entirely of grants. We have affirmed that Canadian assistance will continue to increase to reach the target of 0.6 per cent of gross national product by 1995 and the desired 0.7 per cent target by the year 2000 - now less than 12 years away.
I can best illustrate the importance that we attach to the United Nations by pointing out that Canada is the fourth largest contributor to the United Nations system. Most of its contributions are directed towards development assistance. But Canadians generally feel that more could and should be done. Africa is a very special case. Canada has taken seriously its responsibilities under the United Nations Programme for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. In 1986-1987, Canada disbursed a total of almost 31 billion in Africa, through all channels, multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental. Nearly half of our bilateral assistance will be directed to Africa over the next five years. But poverty in Africa and elsewhere cannot be ended solely through trade and help from developed countries, although these are vital parts of any effective international programme. It will require as well sound national economic and development strategies, and the Governments of the developing countries have a very direct responsibility to their own people to achieve substantial progress.
I have said that we must devote the energies freed by greater security to two equally pressing problems. One is poverty; the other is environmental protection. The world is facing an environmental crisis of unparalleled magnitude. Nature is sending us an urgent message that we ignore at our peril. The signs of this crisis are all around us; shortages of timber, exhausted soil, desertification, depleted fish stocks, seals dying in the North Sea, beluga whales washing ashore in the St. Lawrence River in Canada itself. Some even maintain that we have reached the point where the survival of mankind is at risk.
The Chairman of the World Commission on Environment and Development, Prime Minister Brundtland, has said that the threat to our environmental security is 'second only to nuclear war'. Now that we have lessened the likelihood of global nuclear war, we face invasion by rising seas, polluted air and encroaching deserts. 
There is a growing awareness that the environment, the economy and human health are inextricably linked. At the same time as we in the North suffer the effects of our industrial society's lack of regard for the environment, the South suffers from the environmental degradation engendered by poverty, by population growth and by pressure for immediate economic development.
Destruction of the rain forest in Brazil, deforestation in sub-Saharan Africa and the pollution of drinking water in the sprawling cities of the developing world are the consequences, the simple, direct and inevitable consequences, of people in poverty seeking the simple means to survive. Without improved development opportunities they cannot be expected to do other than search for fuel, shelter and livelihood as best they can. We must help them, with their co-operation and friendship, to protect these precious resources. We require a new era of economic growth, but we need growth that sustains and expands the resource capital of all the countries of this planet, not growth that poisons the air we breathe and the water we drink.
An aboriginal elder in Canada, speaking to a Canadian Government commission, said it best:
'We did not inherit the Earth - we only hold it in trust for our children.'
In a world in which rivers and winds cannot be contained by laws or borders it is clear that domestic initiatives by themselves are inadequate. Canadians know all about this. Our economy, as well as our environment, is being damaged daily by acid rain. We have taken important internal measures to address the problem. We have urgently pressed our neighbour to follow suit and to conclude a treaty with us that would reduce the environmental damage from this blight by stated amounts within specific time-frames. But acid rain is not limited to one nation or one continent: it is an international problem and it demands, I believe, a viable international solution. The greenhouse effect, the deterioration of the ozone layer and the disposal of toxic wastes are causes for legitimate concern both here and around the world.
I am encouraged by the strong emphasis given to the environment by others in this year's debate. Problems of environmental protection require strengthened international co-operation, and the United Nations has a key role to play.
As with security issues, important action has been initiated. The signature a year ago in Montreal of the Protocol on the protection of the ozone layer is a landmark example of what nations working together can accomplish. Ï urge all States which have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Protocol without delay. The increasingly urgent question of global warming and climate change received serious attention at the International Conference on the Changing Atmosphere in Toronto last June. Our goal should be an international framework convention for the protection of the atmosphere by 1992.
We applaud the work of the United Nations Environment Programme in developing a global convention on the trans-frontier movements of hazardous wastes. We hope that it will be ready for signature by Member States next year. This powerful momentum must be maintained and even strengthened. Other steps are needed.
Canada is supporting a feasibility study on a world conservation bank to work in concert with the World Bank. Canada is asking the World Bank at its annual meeting in West Berlin to strengthen the integration of environmental concerns into the design and implementation of its own projects. 
Canada fully supports the holding of an environmental summit at the Heads of Government level. Canada urges all corporations and international industrial and trade associations to develop, strengthen and vigorously apply environmental codes of conduct.
Obviously, wealthier nations have to offer more assistance and greater support to help developing countries achieve growth which does not destroy their environment. And for that reason, the Canadian International Development Agency makes environmental protection one of its criteria for development projects. I want to announce today that Canada will establish a centre which will promote internationally the concept of environmentally sustainable development.
This centre will be located in Winnipeg, Manitoba, and will work closely with the United Nations Environment Programme and other like-minded international institutions and organizations.
Canada strongly supports the call for a United Nations conference on sustainable development in 1992.
The global challenges we face are great, but we are proving that they can be met and that they can be resolved.
Mankind is not destined to destroy itself. War is not inevitable. Poverty can be alleviated. The environment can be preserved. Injustices can be redressed.
The United Nations is not and never will be - ever - a perfect institution. But in the last few years the United Nations has proved that it can make needed reforms and emerge as a stronger and more effective body. We must continue to improve this irreplaceable Organization. Our citizens will judge the United Nations not by the rhetoric of which we are capable, but by the actions that we have achieved in the past and of which are capable again in the future, by our practical successes in working together. An immunization programme that saves children's lives in a developing nation is, in itself, an enduring monument to the profound value of this institution. And surely, there are enough such monuments around to persuade any objective observer of the profound and ongoing value of an institution that treats its Members on a basis of equality and mutual respect. Because now, as the international political climate improves, the United Nations can play the role intended in the Charter.
Lester Pearson, a great Canadian statesman who was present at the creation of this Organization, once observed that the United Nations is the 'living symbol of out interdependence, and embodies that emerging sense of international community, going beyond nation and region, which alone can save us in this nuclear age'.
The United Nations, in my judgement and in the judgement of my Government, reflects the vision of our predecessors and the hope for our children.
The agenda before the United Nations is compelling, and the choices are clears to manage the irresistible forces of change that swirl about us> to acknowledge the intimate interdependence of our world and of the issues before us; to ensure a more peaceful, more prosperous, more humane world, a world in which the strong nations are just, in which the rich nations are generous, a world in which all nations - all nations without exception - have the legitimate hope for greater economic and social justice, understanding as we all must that there is but one Earth for us to preserve for all of our children.
It is a great honour to address 
this Assembly for the second time, nearly two years 
after my election as President of the United States. We 
know this is no ordinary time for our people. We each 
come here with our own problems and priorities. But 
there are also challenges that we share in common as 
leaders and as nations. 
 We meet within an institution built from the 
rubble of war, designed to unite the world in pursuit of 
peace. And we meet within a city that for centuries has 
welcomed people from across the globe, demonstrating 
that individuals of every colour, faith and station can 
come together to pursue opportunity, build a 
community and live with the blessing of human liberty. 
 Outside the doors of this Hall, the blocks and 
neighbourhoods of this great city tell the story of a 
difficult decade. Nine years ago, the destruction of the 
World Trade Center signalled a threat that respected no 
boundary of dignity or decency. Two years ago this 
month, a financial crisis on Wall Street devastated 
American families on Main Street. These separate 
challenges have affected people around the world. Men 
and women and children have been murdered by 
extremists from Casablanca to London, from Jalalabad 
to Jakarta. The global economy suffered an enormous 
blow during the financial crisis, crippling markets and 
deferring the dreams of millions on every continent. 
Underneath these challenges to our security and 
prosperity lie deeper fears: that ancient hatreds and 
religious divides are once again ascendant; that a world 
which has grown more interconnected has somehow 
slipped beyond our control. 
 These are some of the challenges that my 
Administration has confronted since we came into 
office. And today, I would like to talk to the Assembly 
about what we have done over the last 20 months to 
meet these challenges; what our responsibility is to 
pursue peace in the Middle East; and what kind of 
world we are trying to build in this twenty-first 
century. 
 Let me begin with what we have done. I have had 
no greater focus as President than rescuing our 
economy from potential catastrophe. And in an age 
when prosperity is shared, we could not do this alone. 
So America has joined with nations around the world 
to spur growth and the renewed demand that could 
restart job creation. 
 We are reforming our system of global finance, 
beginning with Wall Street reform here at home, so that 
a crisis like this never happens again. And we made the 
Group of 20 the focal point for international 
coordination, because in a world where prosperity is 
more diffuse, we must broaden our circle of 
cooperation to include emerging economies —
economies from every corner of the globe. 
 There is much to show for our efforts, even as 
there is much work to be done. The global economy 
has been pulled back from the brink of a depression 
and is growing once more. We have resisted 
protectionism and are exploring ways to expand trade 
and commerce among nations. But we cannot — and 
will not — rest until these seeds of progress grow into 
a broader prosperity, not only for all Americans but for 
peoples around the world. 
 As for our common security, America is waging a 
more effective fight against Al-Qaida’ while winding 
down the war in Iraq. Since I took office, the United 
States has removed nearly 100,000 troops from Iraq. 
We have done so responsibly as Iraqis have 
transitioned to lead responsibility for the security of 
their country. We are now focused on building a lasting 
partnership with the Iraqi people while keeping our 
commitment to remove the rest of our troops by the 
end of next year. 
 
 
11 10-54827 
 
 While drawing down in Iraq, we have refocused 
on defeating Al-Qaida and denying its affiliates safe 
haven. In Afghanistan, the United States and our allies 
are pursuing a strategy to break the Taliban’s 
momentum and build the capacity of Afghanistan’s 
Government and security forces so that a transition to 
Afghan responsibility can begin next July. And from 
South Asia to the Horn of Africa, we are moving 
towards a more targeted approach — one that 
strengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist 
networks without deploying large American armies. 
 As we pursue the world’s most dangerous 
extremists, we are also denying them the world’s most 
dangerous weapons and pursuing the peace and 
security of a world without nuclear weapons. 
 Earlier this year, 47 nations embraced a work 
plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within 
four years. We have joined with Russia to sign the most 
comprehensive arms control treaty in decades. We have 
reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security 
strategy. And here, at the United Nations, we came 
together to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
 As part of our effort on non-proliferation, I 
offered the Islamic Republic of Iran an extended hand 
last year and underscored that it has both rights and 
responsibilities as a member of the international 
community. I also said — in this Hall — that Iran must 
be held accountable if it failed to meet those 
responsibilities. And that is what we have done. 
 Iran is the only party to the NPT that cannot 
demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclear 
programme, and those actions have consequences. 
Through Security Council resolution 1929 (2010), we 
made it clear that international law is not an empty 
promise. 
 Now let me be clear once more: the United States 
and the international community seek a resolution to 
our differences with Iran, and the door remains open to 
diplomacy should Iran choose to walk through it. But 
the Iranian Government must demonstrate a clear and 
credible commitment and confirm to the world the 
peaceful intent of its nuclear programme.  
 As we combat the spread of deadly weapons, we 
are also confronting the spectre of climate change. 
After making historic investments in clean energy and 
efficiency at home, we helped forge an accord in 
Copenhagen that — for the first time — commits all 
major economies to reduce their emissions. We are 
keenly aware this is just a first step. And going 
forward, we will support a process in which all major 
economies meet our responsibilities to protect the 
planet while unleashing the power of clean energy to 
serve as an engine of growth and development. 
 America has also embraced unique 
responsibilities that come with our power. Since the 
rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we 
have pledged our assistance, and we should all support 
the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild. And 
when the earth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, 
we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today, we 
honour those from the United Nations family who lost 
their lives in the earthquake and commit ourselves to 
stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on 
their own two feet. 
 Amidst this upheaval, we have also been 
persistent in our pursuit of peace. Last year, I pledged 
my best efforts to support the goal of two States, Israel 
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, 
as part of a comprehensive peace between Israel and all 
of its neighbours. We have travelled a winding road 
over the last 12 months, with few peaks and many 
valleys. But this month I am pleased that we have 
pursued direct negotiations between Israelis and 
Palestinians in Washington, Sharm el-Sheikh and 
Jerusalem.  
 Now I recognize that many are pessimistic about 
this process. The cynics say that Israelis and 
Palestinians are too distrustful of each other, and too 
divided internally, to forge lasting peace. Rejectionists 
on both sides will try to disrupt the process with bitter 
words and with bombs and gunfire. Some say that the 
gaps between the parties are too big; the potential for 
talks to break down is too great; and that after decades 
of failure peace is simply not possible.  
 I hear those voices of scepticism. But I ask the 
Assembly to consider the alternative. If an agreement 
is not reached, Palestinians will never know the pride 
and dignity that comes with their own State. Israelis 
will never know the certainty and security that comes 
with sovereign and stable neighbours who are 
committed to coexistence. The hard realities of 
demography will take over. More blood will be shed. 
This Holy Land will remain a symbol of our 
differences, instead of our common humanity.  
  
 
10-54827 12 
 
 I refuse to accept that future. We all have a choice 
to make. Each of us must choose the path of peace. Of 
course, that responsibility begins with the parties 
themselves, who must answer the call of history. 
Earlier this month, at the White House, I was struck by 
the words of both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “I came here today to 
find an historic compromise that will enable both 
peoples to live in peace, security and dignity”. 
President Abbas said, “We will spare no effort and we 
will work diligently and tirelessly to ensure these 
negotiations achieve their cause”. 
 These words must now be followed by action, 
and I believe that both leaders have the courage to do 
so. But the road that they have to travel is exceedingly 
difficult, which is why I call upon Israelis and 
Palestinians — and the world — to rally behind the 
goal that these leaders now share.  
 We know that there will be tests along the way, 
and that one test is fast approaching. Israel’s settlement 
moratorium has made a difference on the ground and 
improved the atmosphere for talks. 
 And our position on this issue is well known. We 
believe that the moratorium should be extended. We 
also believe that talks should press on until completed. 
Now is the time for the parties to help each other 
overcome this obstacle. Now is the time to build the 
trust — and provide the time — for substantial 
progress to be made. Now is the time for this 
opportunity to be seized, so that it does not slip away.  
 Now, peace must be made by Israelis and 
Palestinians, but we each have a responsibility to do 
our part as well. Those of us who are friends of Israel 
must understand that true security for the Jewish State 
requires an independent Palestine — one that allows 
the Palestinian people to live with dignity and 
opportunity. And those of us who are friends of the 
Palestinians must understand that the rights of the 
Palestinian people will be won only through peaceful 
means — including genuine reconciliation with a 
secure Israel. 
 I know many in this Hall count themselves as 
friends of the Palestinians. These pledges of friendship 
must now be supported by deeds. Those who have 
signed on to the Arab Peace Initiative should seize this 
opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps 
towards the normalization that it promises Israel. 
 And those who speak on behalf of Palestinian 
self-government should help the Palestinian Authority 
politically and financially, and in doing so help the 
Palestinians build the institutions of their State. 
 Those who long to see an independent Palestine 
must also stop trying to tear down Israel. After 
thousands of years, Jews and Arabs are not strangers in 
a strange land. After 60 years in the community of 
nations, Israel’s existence must not be a subject for 
debate. 
 Israel is a sovereign State, and the historic 
homeland of the Jewish people. It should be clear to all 
that efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will be 
met by the unshakeable opposition of the United 
States. Efforts to threaten or kill Israelis will do 
nothing to help the Palestinian people. The slaughter of 
innocent Israelis is not resistance; it is injustice. And 
make no mistake: the courage of a man like President 
Abbas, who stands up for his people in front of the 
world under very difficult circumstances, is far greater 
than those who fire rockets at innocent women and 
children. 
 The conflict between Israelis and Arabs is as old 
as the United Nations. And we can come back here 
next year, as we have for the last 60 years, and make 
long speeches about it. We can read familiar lists of 
grievances. We can table the same resolutions. We can 
further empower the forces of rejectionism and hate. 
And we can waste more time by carrying forward an 
argument that will not help a single Israeli or 
Palestinian child achieve a better life. We can do that. 
 Or we can say that this time will be different — 
that this time we will not let terror or turbulence or 
posturing or petty politics stand in the way. This time 
we will think, not of ourselves, but of the young girl in 
Gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams or 
the young boy in Sderot who wants to sleep without the 
nightmare of rocket fire. 
 This time we should draw upon the teachings of 
tolerance that lie at the heart of the three great religions 
that see Jerusalem’s soil as sacred. This time we should 
reach for what is best within ourselves. If we do, when 
we come back here next year, we can have an 
agreement that will lead to a new State Member of the 
United Nations — an independent, sovereign State of 
Palestine living in peace with Israel. 
 
 
13 10-54827 
 
 It is our destiny to bear the burdens of the 
challenges that I have addressed — recession and war 
and conflict. And there is always a sense of urgency, 
even emergency, that drives most of our foreign 
policies. Indeed, after millennia marked by wars, this 
very institution reflects the desire of human beings to 
create a forum to deal with emergencies that will 
inevitably come. 
 But even as we confront immediate challenges, 
we must also summon the foresight to look beyond 
them and consider what we are trying to build over the 
long term. What is the world that awaits us when 
today’s battles are brought to an end? And, that is what 
I would like to talk about with the remainder of my 
time today. 
 One of the first actions of the General Assembly 
was to adopt the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights in 1948. This Declaration begins by stating that, 
“recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal 
and inalienable rights of all members of the human 
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace 
in the world”.  
 The idea is a simple one — that freedom, justice 
and peace for the world must begin with freedom, 
justice and peace in the lives of individual human 
beings. For the United States, this is a matter of moral 
and pragmatic assessment. As Robert Kennedy said, 
“the individual man, the child of God, is the touchstone 
of value, and all society, groups, the state exist for his 
benefit”.  
 So we stand up for universal values because it is 
the right thing to do. But we also know from 
experience that those who defend these values for their 
people have been our closest friends and allies, while 
those who have denied those rights — whether terrorist 
groups or tyrannical Governments — have chosen to be 
our adversaries. 
 Human rights have never gone unchallenged — 
not in any of our nations, not in our world. Tyranny is 
still with us — whether it manifests itself in the 
Taliban killing girls who try to go to school, a North 
Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an 
armed group in Congo-Kinshasa that use rape as a 
weapon of war. 
 In times of economic unease, there can also be an 
anxiety about human rights. Today, as in past times of 
economic downturn, some put human rights aside for 
the promise of short-term stability or the false notion 
that economic growth can come at the expense of 
freedom. We see leaders abolishing term limits, we see 
crackdowns on civil society, we see corruption 
smothering entrepreneurship and good governance, we 
see democratic reforms deferred indefinitely. 
 As I said last year, each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its own people. Yet 
experience shows us that history is on the side of 
liberty; that the strongest foundation lies in open 
economies, open societies, and open Governments. To 
put it simply, democracy, more than any other form of 
government, delivers for our citizens. And I believe 
that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the 
borders between nations are blurred. 
 America is working to shape a world that fosters 
this openness. For the rot of a closed or corrupt 
economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation 
of human beings.All of us want the right to educate our 
children, to make a decent wage, to care for the sick, 
and to be carried as far as our dreams and deeds will 
take us. But that depends upon economies that tap the 
power of our people, including the potential of women 
and girls. That means letting entrepreneurs start a 
business without paying a bribe and Governments that 
support opportunity instead of stealing from their 
people. And that means rewarding hard work, instead 
of reckless risk-taking. 
 Yesterday, I put forward a new development 
policy that will pursue these goals, recognizing that 
dignity is a human right and global development is in 
our common interest. America will partner with nations 
that offer their people a path out of poverty. And 
together, we must unleash growth that powers by 
individuals and merging markets in all parts of the 
globe. 
 There is no reason why Africa should not be an 
exporter of agriculture, which is why our food security 
initiative is empowering farmers. There is no reason 
why entrepreneurs should not be able to build new 
markets in every society, which is why I hosted a 
summit on entrepreneurship earlier this spring, because 
the obligation of Government is to empower 
individuals, not to impede them. 
 The same holds true for civil society. The arc of 
human progress has been shaped by individuals with 
the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside 
of government that insisted upon democratic change 
  
 
10-54827 14 
 
and by free media that held the powerful accountable. 
We have seen that from the South Africans who stood 
up to apartheid, to the Poles of Solidarity, to the 
mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the 
Dirty War, to Americans who marched for the rights of 
all races, including my own. 
 Civil society is the conscience of our 
communities and America will always extend our 
engagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of 
Government. And we will call out those who suppress 
ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless. 
We will promote new tools of communication so 
people are empowered to connect with one another 
and, in repressive societies, to do so with security. We 
will support a free and open Internet, so individuals 
have the information to make up their own minds. And 
it is time to embrace and effectively monitor norms 
that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee 
its expansion within and across borders. 
 Open society supports open government, but it 
cannot substitute for it. There is no right more 
fundamental than the right to choose your leaders and 
determine your destiny. Now, make no mistake: the 
ultimate success of democracy in the world will not 
come because the United States dictates it; it will come 
because individual citizens demand a say in how they 
are governed. 
 There is no soil where this cannot take root, just 
as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation. 
Later this fall, I will travel to Asia. And I will visit 
India, which peacefully threw off colonialism and 
established a thriving democracy of over a billion 
people. 
 I will continue to Indonesia, the world’s largest 
Muslim-majority country, which binds together 
thousands of islands through the glue of representative 
government and civil society. I will join the Group-of-
20 meeting on the Korean peninsula, which provides 
the world’s clearest contrast between a society that is 
dynamic and open and free, and one that is imprisoned 
and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an 
ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary 
development through democracy. 
 Each of these countries gives life to democratic 
principles in its own way. And even as some 
Governments roll back reform, we also celebrate the 
courage of a President in Colombia who willingly 
stepped aside, or the promise of a new constitution in 
Kenya.  
 The common thread of progress is the principle 
that government is accountable to its citizens. And the 
diversity in this Hall makes clear — no one country 
has all the answers, but all of us must answer to our 
own people. 
 In all parts of the world, we see the promise of 
innovation to make government more open and 
accountable. And now we must build on that progress. 
And when we gather back here next year, we should 
bring specific commitments to promote transparency; 
to fight corruption; to energize civic engagement; to 
leverage new technology so that we strengthen the 
foundations of freedom in our own countries, while 
living up to the ideals that can light the world. 
 This institution can still play an indispensable 
role in the advance of human rights. It is time to 
welcome the efforts of UN Women to protect the rights 
of women around the world. 
 It is time for every Member State to open its 
elections to international monitors and increase the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. It is time to 
invigorate United Nations peacekeeping, so that 
missions have the resources necessary to succeed, and 
so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented and 
justice is enforced — because neither dignity nor 
democracy can thrive without basic security.  
 It is time to make this institution more 
accountable as well, because the challenges of the new 
century demand new ways of serving our common 
interests. 
 The world that America seeks is not one we can 
build on our own. For human rights to reach those who 
suffer the boot of oppression, we need your voices to 
speak out. In particular, I appeal to those nations that 
emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the 
second half of the last century — from South Africa to 
South Asia; from Eastern Europe to South America. Do 
not stand idly by, do not be silent, when dissidents 
elsewhere are imprisoned and protesters are beaten, 
recall your own history. Because part of the price of 
our own freedom is standing up for the freedom of 
others.  
 That belief will guide America’s leadership in 
this twenty-first century. It is a belief that has seen us 
through more than two centuries of trial, and it will see 
 
 
15 10-54827 
 
us through the challenges we face today — be they war 
or recession; conflict or division. 
 So even as we have come through a difficult 
decade, I stand here before you confident in the 
future — a future where Iraq is governed by neither a 
tyrant nor a foreign Power, and Afghanistan is freed 
from the turmoil of war; a future where the children of 
Israel and Palestine can build the peace that was not 
possible for their parents; a world where the promise of 
development reaches into the prisons of poverty and 
disease; a future where the cloud of recession gives 
way to the light of renewal, and the dream of 
opportunity is available to all.  
 This future will not be easy to reach. It will not 
come without setbacks, nor will it be quickly claimed. 
But the founding of the United Nations itself is a 
testament to human progress. Remember, in times that 
were far more trying than our own, our predecessors 
chose the hope of unity over the ease of division and 
made a promise to future generations that the dignity 
and equality of human beings would be our common 
cause. 
 It falls to us to fulfil that promise. And though we 
will be met by dark forces that will test our resolve, 
Americans have always had cause to believe that we 
can choose a better history; that we need only to look 
outside the walls around us. For through the citizens of 
every conceivable ancestry who make this city their 
own, we see living proof that opportunity can be 
accessed by all, that what unites us as human beings is 
far greater than what divides us, and that people from 
every part of this world can live together in peace.It has 
now been more than 65 years since the nations of the 
world, exhausted, and in some cases devastated, by 
years of war, established the United Nations. Canada 
was one of those nations — one of the many, in fact, 
whose fresh experience of conflict had persuaded their 
peoples that the possibility of a better world, one in 
which nations resolved their differences peacefully, 
was an objective worthy of their every effort. 
 Today, the Canadian people continue to believe in 
that purpose and will continue to strive to live by the 
principles that would make it possible. Such principles are enshrined in the Charter of 
this Organization; that same United Nations Charter 
endorsed with happiness and hope by a former 
Canadian Government on that auspicious June day in 
San Francisco in 1945. 
 Those foundational beliefs recognize the 
sovereign equality of countries. They remind us of the 
obligation to settle disputes peacefully, and they 
demand we seek justice and uphold the human rights of 
all people. Those are values that Canadians hold dear, 
and, as the universal membership of this body implies, 
so do peoples the world over. That widespread 
consensus continues to convince the idealist in all of us 
that so much more is possible in this world of ours. 
 At the same time, it makes the gap between 
aspiration and achievement so disappointing. It calls us 
onward to do more, as successive Canadian 
Governments have worked diligently to do for almost a 
lifetime. 
 Those ideals, as well as an acute awareness of the 
broad concerns of the international community, 
especially those of the developing countries, continue 
to animate the Government of Canada, the Government 
that I lead today.
 Those ideals have the enthusiastic support of the 
Canadian people, and I do not foresee any day or 
motivation that would lead us to cease in our 
endeavours in this regard.  
 The question, as always, is how this is to be done. 
Our preference is to take meaningful action, action that 
produces real results, action that helps people in their 
struggle with oppression, disaster and poverty.
 Let me just run through some of those actions. As 
a founding member of the United Nations and the 
seventh-largest contributor to its finances, Canada has 
been a consistently reliable and responsible participant 
in United Nations initiatives around the world. This 
was so in the earliest days of the United Nations. It was 
so during the difficult days of the cold war, 
decolonization and the struggle against apartheid, and 
it remains so today. Canada continues to pay, for 
instance, a heavy price to fulfil our United Nations 
obligation to support the lawful Government of 
Afghanistan. We pay it with the resources of Canadian 
taxpayers, but more profoundly in sorrow for the 
priceless lives of our young men and women who serve 
there in the Canadian forces, as well as, sadly, civilians 
who have also given their sweat and their lives in the 
service of both our country and the people of 
Afghanistan. 
 In Afghanistan, our military efforts have gone 
hand in hand with our reconstruction and development 
programmes. In particular, Canada supports those such 
as the Dahla Dam, which will have enduring economic 
benefit. 
We have also invested heavily in other programmes 
which will improve the lives of that country’s most 
vulnerable citizens, and we will continue to do so. 
 Our international engagement is by no means 
restricted to Afghanistan. In fact, elsewhere in the 
world, we have also expanded our efforts. We pledge to 
 
 
45 10-54827 
 
double our aid to Africa,thereby making Canada a 
leader in the Group of Eight (G-8). 
And we are on track to double our overall development 
assistance by March of next year. Furthermore, we 
have untied food aid, and all Canadian aid will be 
untied by 2013. Such measures significantly extend the 
purchasing power of Canadian aid funds. 
 Canada was also among the first last year at the 
G-8 Summit at L’Aquila to double support for 
agricultural development. During the economic crisis 
as well, we acted, in concert with our Group of Twenty 
(G-20) partners, to increase the lending capacity of 
development organizations like the Inter-American 
Development Bank and the African Development 
Bank. In particular, we have made a significant 
contribution to peace and security in Africa, including 
to peace initiatives, humanitarian assistance and 
reconstruction in the Sudan, since taking office in 
January 2006. 
We have also provided leadership in peacebuilding in 
Sierra Leone.  
 Canada welcomes the resumption of direct talks 
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. We 
sincerely hope that the discussions will be successful, 
and we will continue to assist the Palestinian Authority 
in building its institutions.  
 As members know, we have also engaged very 
extensively in Haiti, both before and since the terrible 
earthquake earlier this year. Canada was among the 
first nations to provide tangible relief in various forms, 
and it has made a long-term commitment to assist the 
people of Haiti in rebuilding their severely damaged 
country. 
 Most recently, Pakistan has faced devastating 
floods, and Canada has again responded swiftly. All 
these actions are born from Canadian ideals. 
 So allow me to say one thing. This Assembly 
should know that Canada is eligible to serve on the 
Security Council. And if we are elected, we will be 
ready to serve. 
And if called upon to serve on the Security Council, we 
shall be informed by these ideals and strive to further 
them, just as we have striven to implement Security 
Council resolutions. 
 I should also mention Canada’s role this year as 
Chair of the G-8 and host of the most recent meeting of 
the G-20. We have tried to ensure that these gatherings 
serve the broader interests of the entire global 
community. In preparation for the G-20, we conducted 
wide-ranging outreach sessions, including with the 
Secretaries-General of the Commonwealth, la 
Francophonie and, of course, this Organization. We 
used our chairmanship of the G-8 to reach out to 
leaders from Africa and the Americas and to secure an 
agreement to enact the Muskoka Initiative for 
maternal, newborn and child health.  
Such progress is literally vital in meeting the most 
achievable of the United Nations Millennium 
Development Goals — to reduce the appalling 
mortality among mothers and children in developing 
countries. 
 We are mobilizing support from donor nations 
and private foundations. Together, we should be able to 
mobilize more than $10 billion over five years. This 
will contribute in a major way to the Secretary-
General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s 
Health. Likewise, we announced here two day ago that 
Canadian taxpayers would make an enhanced 
replenishment of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria.
 We did these things for one simple reason: to 
alleviate the suffering and, indeed, save the lives of 
people all over the world who are among the millions 
afflicted with these grave and debilitating diseases. 
Actions such as these are a moral imperative. It is 
essential that we strive to make a significant, actual 
difference in the lives of the world’s most 
disadvantaged people. Who, seeing his neighbour 
distressed, will pass by on the other side of the road? 
 That is why we have also used our chairmanship 
of the G-8 to further the essential ethic of 
accountability. We published the first accountability 
report to ensure that, as donor countries, we fulfil the 
pledges that we make. Our words must be translated 
into action and we must make a real difference to those 
who need our help. And to that end, as many of you 
also know, Canadian taxpayers have forgiven debts 
  
 
10-54827 46 
 
totalling $1 billion owed by the world’s poorest 
countries. 
 However, let us not limit our horizons by looking 
just at the least we can do. Much higher goals are 
within our capacity if we will but reach for them. In the 
short time that I have here today, there is one thought 
above all others that I wish to share.
 It is the pressing need in the twenty-first century 
for all the States of the world to adopt an enlightened 
view of sovereignty. As I said earlier, respect for 
sovereignty is a fundamental principle of the United 
Nations. However, the global recession of the past two 
years has taught us, we hope, a painful lesson. We have 
been forcefully reminded that, in this shrinking world, 
we all travel together in a single boat, not as solo 
voyagers, and that how we travel together matters. This 
is because our interests are all interconnected: from 
climate change to health and pandemic threats and to, 
of course, the economy.
 For example, nations that do not consider the 
effects of their economic choices on others may hurt 
not only their trading partners, but themselves as well. 
Those who succumb to the lure of protectionism soon 
find that trading partners denied a market also lack the 
means to be a customer. To recognize that is to 
understand the need for enlightened sovereignty, the 
idea that what is good for others may well be the best 
way to pursue one’s own interests. In business, it is 
called win-win, and it is good for business. In 
international affairs, it is good for development and for 
justice, and it is in the spirit of the United Nations 
Charter. It is therefore of the highest importance, in a 
passionate world of competing interests and principles, 
where every person left to himself does what is right in 
his own sight. In such a world, the need for an 
enlightened, expansive view of sovereignty is as great 
now as it ever was. 
 At the outset of these remarks, I referred to the 
origins of the United Nations. It was founded at the end 
of the greatest and most destructive war that had ever 
disturbed the ocean of humanity. That war was 
certainly attributable in part to an extreme and 
pernicious nationalism. But we should never forget that 
appeasement and expediency also allowed fascism to 
gather such strength that it required the whole and 
undivided effort of the world’s free peoples to subdue 
it. 
 The United Nations mission has grown over time, 
but its core job remains the same: through peace and 
development, to build a better world, to prevent war 
and conflict, yet at the same time, to uphold what is 
right and to protect the weak and the poor from those 
who prey upon them.
 The Government of Canada has always been 
deeply committed to these objectives and to the 
Organization that nurtures them. It remains so today.
 As we attend to our own affairs, in, for example, 
the protection of Canada’s Arctic or the promotion of 
our trade or the pursuit of our values, Canada will be 
guided by the same advice we prescribe for others. We 
will listen to their concerns, we will speak the truth, 
and we will act with vigour. We will do all these things 
ever mindful that peace and opportunity for all remain, 
always, our ultimate purpose.  
 I know it has been a long meeting this morning, 
and I thank members for their attention.﻿First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. Lusaka, on your election as President of the General Assembly. I wish you every success in carrying out the responsibilities of that high international office.
3.	It is an honour to be here, and I thank you all for your gracious invitation. I would speak in support of the two great goals that led to the formation of the United Nations—the cause of peace and the cause of human dignity.
4.	The responsibility of the General Assembly—the peaceful resolution of disputes between peoples and nations—can be discharged successfully only if we recognize the great common ground upon which we all stand: our fellowship as members of the human race, our oneness as inhabitants of this planet, our place as representatives of billions of our countrymen whose fondest hope remains the end to war and to the repression of the human spirit. These are the important, central realities that bind us, that per-
us to dream of a future without the antagonisms of the past. And, just as shadows can be seen only where there is light, so, too, can we overcome what is wrong only if we remember how much is right; and we will resolve what divides us only if we remember how much more unites us. This chamber has heard enough about the problems and dangers ahead; today let us dare to speak of a future that is bright and hopeful and can be ours only if we seek it. I believe that future is far nearer than most of us would dare to hope.
5.	At the start of this decade one scholar at the Hudson Institute noted that mankind also had undergone enormous changes for the better in the past two centuries, changes which are not always readily noticed or written about.
6.	'Up until 200 years ago, there were relatively few people in the world,' he wrote. 'All human societies were poor. Disease and early death dominated most people's lives. People were ignorant, and largely at the mercy of forces of nature.'
7.	'Now,' he said, 'we are somewhere near the middle of a process of economic development ... At the end of that process, almost no one will live in a country as poor as the richest country of the past. There will be many more people .. . living long, healthy lives, with immense knowledge and more to learn than anybody has time for.' They will be 'able to cope with the forces of nature, and almost indifferent to distance.'
8.	We do live today, as that scholar suggested, in the middle of one of the most important and dramatic periods in human history—one in which all of us can serve as catalysts for an era of world peace and unimagined human freedom and dignity.
9.	Today I would like to report to you, as distinguished and influential members of the world community, on what the United States has been attempting to do to help move the world closer to this new era. On many fronts enormous progress has been made, and I think our efforts are complemented by the trend of history.
10.	If we look closely enough, I believe we can see all the world moving towards a deeper appreciation of the value of human freedom in both its political and its economic manifestations. This is partially motivated by a world-wide desire for economic growth and higher standards of living. And there is an increasing realization that economic freedom is a prelude to economic progress and growth and is intricately and inseparably linked to political freedom.
11.	Everywhere, people and Governments are beginning to recognize that the secret of a progressive new world is to take advantage of the creativity of the human spirit; to encourage innovation and individual enterprise; to reward hard work; and to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and information.
12.	Our opposition to economic restrictions and trade barriers is consistent with our view of economic freedom and human progress. We believe such barriers pose a particularly dangerous threat to the developing nations and their chance to share in world prosperity through expanded export markets. Tomorrow, at the International Monetary Fund, I will address this question more fully, including America's desire for more open trading markets throughout the world.
13.	This desire to cut down trade barriers and our open advocacy of freedom as the engine of human progress are two of the important ways the United States and the American people hope to assist in bringing about a world where prosperity is commonplace, conflict an aberration, and human dignity and freedom a way of life.
14.	Let me place these steps more in context by briefly outlining the major goals of American foreign
A/39/PV.4 

policy and then exploring with you the practical ways we are attempting to further freedom and prevent war. By that I mean, first, how we have moved to strengthen ties with old allies and new friends; secondly, what we are doing to help avoid the regional conflicts that could contain the seeds of world conflagration; and thirdly, the status of our efforts with the Soviet Union to reduce the levels of arms.
15.	Let me begin with a word about the objectives of American foreign policy, which have been consistent since the post-war era and which fuelled the formation of the United Nations and were incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations itself.
16.	The Charter states two overriding goals: 'to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind' and 'to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small'.
17.	The founders of the United Nations understood full well the relationship between these two goals. And I want you to know that the Government of the United States will continue to view this concern for human rights as the moral centre of our foreign policy. We can never look at anyone's freedom as a bargaining chip in world politics. Our hope is for a time when all the people of the world can enjoy the blessings of personal liberty.
18.	But I would like also to emphasize that our concern for protecting human rights is part of our concern for protecting the peace.
19.	The answer is for all nations to fulfil the obligations they freely assumed under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration states that: 'The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections'. The Declaration also includes the right of everyone: 'to form and to join trade unions,' 'to own property alone as well as in association with others,' 'to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country,' and to enjoy 'freedom of opinion and expression'. Perhaps the most graphic example of the relationship between human rights and peace is the right of peace groups to exist and to promote their views. In fact, the treatment of peace groups may be a litmus test of a Government's true desire for peace.
20.	In addition to emphasizing this tie between the advocacy of human rights and the prevention of war, the United States has taken important steps, as I mentioned earlier, to prevent world conflict. The starting-point and comer-stone of our foreign policy is our alliance and partnership with our fellow democracies. For 35 years, the North Atlantic alliance has guaranteed the peace in Europe. In both Europe and Asia, our alliances have been the vehicle for a great reconciliation among nations that had fought bitter wars in decades and centuries past. And here in the western hemisphere, North and South are being lifted on the tide of freedom and are joined in a common effort to foster peaceful economic development.
21.	We are proud of our association with all those countries that share our commitment to freedom, human rights, the rule of law—and international peace. Indeed, the bulwark of security that the democratic alliance provides is essential, and remains essential, to the maintenance of world peace. Every alliance involves burdens and obligations, but these are far less than the risks and sacrifices that would result if the peace-loving nations were divided and neglectful of their common security. The people of the United States will remain faithful to their commitments.
22.	But the United States is also faithful to its alliances and friendships with scores of nations in the developed and developing worlds with differing political systems, cultures and traditions. The development of ties between the United States and China—a significant global event of the last dozen years—shows our willingness to improve relations with countries ideologically very different from ours.
23.	We are ready to be the friend of any country that is a friend to us and a friend of peace. And we respect genuine non-alignment. Our own nation was born in revolution; we helped promote the process of decolonization that brought about the independence of so many members of this body, and we are proud of that history.
24.	We are proud, too, of our role in the formation of the United Nations and our support of the Organization over the years. And let me again emphasize our unwavering commitment to a central principle of the United Nations system, the principle of universality, both here and in the United Nations technical agencies around the world. If universality is ignored, if nations are expelled illegally, then the United Nations itself cannot be expected to succeed.
25.	The United States welcomes diversity and peaceful competition; we do not fear the trends of history. We are not ideologically rigid; we do have principles and we will stand by them, but we will also seek the friendship and goodwill of all, both old friends and new.
26.	We have always sought to lend a hand to help others—from our relief efforts in Europe after the First World War to the Marshall Plan and massive foreign assistance programmes after the Second World War. Since 1946, the United States has provided over $115 billion in economic aid to developing countries, and today it provides about one third of the nearly $90 billion in financial resources, public and private, that flows to the developing world. And the United States imports about one third of the manufactured exports of the developing world.
27.	But any economic progress, as well as any movement in the direction of greater understanding between the nations of the world, is, of course, endangered by the prospect of conflict at both the global and the regional levels. In a few minutes I will turn to the menace of conflict on a world-wide scale and discuss the status of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. But permit me first to address the critical problem of regional conflicts, for history displays tragic evidence that it is these conflicts which can set off the sparks leading to world-wide conflagration.
28.	In a glass display case across the hall from the Oval Office at the White House there is a gold medal—the Nobel Peace Prize won by Theodore Roosevelt for his contribution in mediating the Russo-Japanese War in 1905. It was the first such prize won by an American, and it is part of a tradition of which the American people are very 
proud, a tradition that is being continued today in many regions of the globe.
29.	We are engaged, for example, in diplomacy to resolve conflicts in southern Africa, working with the front-line States and our partners in the Contact Group. Mozambique and South Africa have reached a historic accord on non-aggression and co-operation; South Africa and Angola have agreed on a disengagement of forces from Angola, and the groundwork has been laid for the independence of Namibia, with virtually all aspects of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) agreed upon. Let me add that the United States considers it a moral imperative that South Africa's racial policies evolve peacefully but decisively towards a system compatible with basic norms of justice, liberty and human dignity. I am pleased that American companies in South Africa, by providing equal employment opportunities, are contributing to the economic advancement of the black population. But clearly, much more must be done.
30.	In Central America, the United States has lent support to a diplomatic process to restore regional peace and security. We have committed substantial resources to promote economic development and social progress.
31.	The growing success of democracy in El Salvador is the best proof that the key to peace lies in a political solution. Free elections brought into office a government dedicated to democracy, reform, economic progress and regional peace. Regrettably, there are forces in the region eager to thwart democratic change, but these forces are now on the defensive. The tide is turning in the direction of freedom. We call upon Nicaragua, in particular, to abandon its policies of subversion and militarism, and to carry out the promises it made to the Organization of American States to establish democracy at home.
32.	The Middle East has known more than its share of tragedy and conflict for decades, and the United States has been actively involved in peace diplomacy for just as long. We consider ourselves a full partner in the quest for peace. The record of the 11 years since the October war shows that much can be achieved through negotiations; it also shows that the road is long and hard.
33.	Two years ago, I proposed a fresh start toward a negotiated solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. My initiative of 1 September 1982 contains a set of positions that can serve as a basis for a just and lasting peace.' That initiative remains a realistic and workable approach, and I am committed to it as firmly as on the day I announced it. And the foundation-stone of this effort remains Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which, in turn, was incorporated in all its parts in the Camp David accords.
34.	The tragedy of Lebanon has not ended. Only last week, a despicable act of barbarism by some who are unfit to associate with humankind reminded us once again that Lebanon continues to suffer. In 1983 we helped Israel and Lebanon reach an agreement that, if implemented, could have led to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces in the context of the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This agreement was blocked, and the long agony of the Lebanese continues. Thousands of people are still kept from their homes by continued violence and are refugees in their own country. The once-flourishing economy of
Lebanon is near collapse. All of Lebanon's friends should work together to help end this nightmare.
35.	In the Gulf, the United States has supported a series of Security Council resolutions that call for an end to the war between Iran and Iraq that has meant so much death and destruction and has put the world's economic well-being at risk. Our hope is that hostilities will soon end, leaving each side with its political and territorial integrity intact, so that both may devote their energies to addressing the needs of their people and a return to relationships with other States.
36.	The lesson of experience is that negotiations work. The peace treaty between Israel and Egypt brought about the peaceful return of the Sinai, clearly showing that the negotiating process brings results when the parties commit themselves to it. The time is bound to come when the same wisdom and courage will be applied, with success, to reach peace between Israel and all of its Arab neighbours in a manner that assures security for all in the region, the recognition of Israel, and a solution to the Palestinian problem.
37.	In every part of the world, the United States is similarly engaged in peace diplomacy as an active player or a strong supporter.
38.	In South-East Asia, we have backed the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
to mobilize international support for a peaceful resolution of the Cambodian problem, which must include the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and the election of a representative government. ASEAN's success in promoting economic and political development has made a major contribution to the peace and stability of the region.
39.	In Afghanistan, the dedicated efforts of the Secretary-General and his representatives to find a diplomatic settlement have our strong support. I assure the General Assembly that the United States will continue to do everything possible to find a negotiated outcome which provides the Afghan people with the right to determine their own destiny, allows the Afghan refugees to return to *heir own country in dignity, and protects the legitimate security interests of all neighbouring countries.
40.	On the divided and tense Korean peninsula, we have strongly backed the confidence-building measures proposed by the Republic of Korea and by the United Nations Command at Panmunjom. These are an important first step towards peaceful reunification in the long term.
41.	We take heart from progress by others in lessening tensions, notably the efforts by the Federal Republic of Germany to reduce barriers between the two German States.
42.	And the United States strongly supports the Secretary-General's efforts to assist the Cypriot parties in achieving a peaceful and reunited Cyprus.
43.	The United States has been and will always be a friend of peaceful solutions.
44.	This is no less true with respect to my country's relations with the Soviet Union.
45.	When I appeared before the General Assembly, at its thirty-eighth session. I noted that we cannot count on the instinct for survival alone to protect us against war. Deterrence is necessary but not sufficient. America has repaired its strength. We have invigorated our alliances and friendships. We are ready for constructive negotiations with the Soviet Union.
46.	We recognize that there is no sane alternative to negotiations on arms control and other issues between our two nations, which have the capacity to destroy civilization as we know it. I believe this is a view shared by virtually every country in the world and by the Soviet Union itself.
47.	I want to speak to the General Assembly today on what the United States and the Soviet Union can accomplish together in the coming years, and the concrete steps that we need to take.
48.	As I stand here and look out from this podium, there in front of me I can see the seat of the representative of the Soviet Union, and not far from that seat, just over to the side, is the seat of the representative of the United States. In this historic assembly hall it is clear there is not a great distance between us. Outside this room, while there will still be clear differences, there is every reason why we should do all that is possible to shorten that distance. That is why we are here. Is that not what the United Nations is all about?
49.	On 16 January last, I set out three objectives for United States-Soviet relations that can provide an agenda for our work over the months ahead.
50.	First, I said, we need to find ways to reduce, and eventually to eliminate, the threat and use of force in solving international disputes. Our concern over the potential for nuclear war cannot deflect us from the terrible human tragedies occurring every day in the regional conflicts I have just discussed. Together we have a particular responsibility to contribute to political solutions to these problems, rather than to exacerbate them through the provision of even more weapons.
51.	I propose that our two countries agree to embark on periodic consultations at policy level about regional problems. We will be prepared, if the Soviets agree, to make senior experts available at regular intervals for in-depth exchanges of views. I have asked Secretary of State Shultz to explore this with Foreign Minister Gromyko. Spheres of influence are a thing of the past. Differences between American and Soviet interests are not. The objectives of this political dialogue will be to help avoid miscalculation, reduce the potential risk of United States-Soviet confrontation and help the people in areas of conflict to find peaceful solutions.
52.	The United States and the Soviet Union have achieved agreements of historic importance on some regional issues. The Austrian State Treaty and the Berlin accords are notable and lasting examples. Let us resolve to achieve similar agreements in the future.
53.	Our second task must be to find ways to reduce the vast stockpiles of armaments in the world. I am committed to redoubling our negotiating efforts to achieve real results: in Geneva, a complete ban on chemical weapons; in Vienna, real reductions—to lower and equal levels—in Soviet and American, Warsaw Pact and North Atlantic Treaty Organization conventional forces; in Stockholm, concrete practical measures to enhance mutual confidence, to reduce the risk of war and to reaffirm commitments concerning non-use of force; in the field of nuclear testing, improvements in verification essential to ensure compliance with the threshold test-ban and peaceful nuclear explosions agreements; and in the field of non-proliferation, close co-operation to strengthen the international institutions and practices aimed at halting the Spread of nuclear weapons, together with redoubled efforts to meet the legitimate expectation of all nations that the Soviet Union and the United States will substantially reduce their own nuclear arsenals. We and the Soviets have agreed to upgrade our hotline communications facility, and our discussions of nuclear non-proliferation in recent years have been useful to both sides. We think there are other possibilities for improving communications in this area that deserve serious exploration.
54.	I believe the proposal of the Soviet Union for opening United States-Soviet talks at Vienna provides an important opportunity to advance these objectives. We have been prepared to discuss a wide range of issues of concern to both sides, such as the relationship between defensive and offensive forces and what has been called the militarization of space. During the talks we would consider what measures of restraint both sides might take while negotiations proceeded. However, any agreement must logically depend upon our ability to get the competition in offensive arms under control and to achieve genuine stability at substantially lower levels of nuclear arms.
55.	Our approach in all these areas will be designed to take into account concerns the Soviet Union has voiced. It will attempt to provide a basis for a historic breakthrough in arms control. I am disappointed that we were not able to open our meeting at Vienna earlier this month on the date originally proposed by the Soviet Union. I hope we can begin these talks by the end of the year or shortly thereafter.
56.	The third task I set in January was to establish a better working relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, one marked by greater co-operation and understanding.
57.	We have made some modest progress. We have reached agreements to improve our hotline, extend our 10-year economic agreement, enhance consular co-operation and explore co-ordination of search and rescue efforts at sea.
58.	We have also offered to increase significantly the amount of United States grain for purchase by the Soviets and to provide the Soviets with a direct fishing allocation off United States coasts. But there is much more we could do together. I feel particularly strongly about breaking down the barriers between the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union and between our political, military and other leaders.
59.	AH of these steps that I have mentioned, and especially the arms control negotiations, are extremely important to a step-by-step process towards peace. But let me also say that we need to extend the arms control process, to build a bigger umbrella under which it can operate—a road-map, as it were, showing where during the next 20 years or so these individual efforts can lead. This can greatly assist step-by-step negotiations and enable us to avoid having all our hopes or expectations ride on any single set or series of negotiations. If progress is temporarily halted at one set of talks, this newly established framework for arms control could help us take up the slack at other negotiations.
60.	Today, to the great end of lifting the dread of nuclear war from the peoples of the Earth, I invite the leaders of the world to join in a new beginning. We 
need a fresh approach to reducing international tensions. History demonstrates beyond controversy that, just as the arms competition has its roots in political suspicions and anxieties, so it can be channelled in more stabilizing directions and eventually be eliminated, if those political suspicions and anxieties are addressed as well.
61.	Towards this end I will suggest to the Soviet Union that we institutionalize regular ministerial or cabinet-level meetings between our two countries on the whole agenda of issues before us, including the problem of needless obstacles to understanding. To take but one idea for discussion, in such talks we could consider the exchange of outlines of five-year military plans for weapons development and our schedules of intended procurement. We would also welcome the exchange of observers at military exercises and locations. And I propose that we find a way for Soviet experts to come to the United States nuclear-test site, and for ours to go to theirs, to measure directly the yields of tests of nuclear weapons. We should work towards having such arrangements in place by next spring. I hope that the Soviet Union will co-operate in this undertaking and reciprocate in a manner that will enable the two countries to establish the basis for verification for effective limits on underground nuclear testing.
62.	I believe such talks could work rapidly towards developing a new climate of policy understanding, one that is essential if crises are to be avoided and real arms control is to be negotiated. Of course, summit meetings have a useful role to play. But they need to be carefully prepared, and the benefit here is that meetings at the ministerial level would provide the kind of progress that is the best preparation for higher-level talks between ourselves and the Soviet leaders.
63.	How much progress we will make, and at what pace, I cannot say, but we have a moral obligation to try and try again.
64.	Some may dismiss such proposals and my own optimism as simplistic American idealism. And they will point to the burdens of the modem world and to history. Well, yes, if we sit down and catalogue year by year, generation by generation, the famines, the plagues, the wars, the invasions mankind has endured, the list will grow so long and the assault on humanity so terrifying that it seems too much for the human spirit ^o bear.
65.	But is that not narrow and short-sighted and not at all how we think of history? Yes, the deeds of infamy or injustice are all recorded, but what shines out from the pages of history is the daring of the dreamers and the deeds of the builders and the doers. These things make up the stories we tell and pass on to our children. They comprise the most enduring and striking fact about human history: that through the heart-break and tragedy man has always dared to perceive the outline of human progress, the steady growth in not just the material well-being but the spiritual insight of mankind.
'There have been tyrants and murderers, and for a time they can seem invincible. But in the end, they always fall. Think on it—always. All through history the way of truth and love has always won.'
That 'as the belief and the vision of Mahatma Gandhi, and it remains today a vision that is good and true.
66.	'All is gift' is said to have been the favourite expression of another great spiritualist, a Spanish soldier who gave up the ways of war for that of love and peace. And if we are to make realities of the two great goals of the Charter of the United Nations—the dreams of peace and human dignity—we must take to heart these words of Ignatius Loyola: 'We must pause long enough to contemplate the gifts received from Him who made us—the gift of life, the gift of this world, the gift of each other.'
67.	And the gift of the present, for it is this present, this time, that now we must seize. I leave you with a reflection from Mahatma Gandhi spoken with those in mind who said that the disputes and conflicts of the modem world are too great to overcome. It was spoken shortly after Gandhi's quest for independence had taken him to Britain.
'I am not conscious of a single experience throughout my three months' stay in England and Europe that made me feel that after all East is East and West is West. On the contrary, I have been convinced more than ever that human nature is much the same no matter under what clime it flourishes and that, if you approach people with trust and affection, you would have tenfold trust and thousand-fold affection returned to you.'
68.	For the sake of a peaceful world, a world where human dignity and freedom are respected and enshrined, let us approach each other with tenfold trust and thousand fold affection. A new future awaits us. The time is here, the moment is now.
69.	One of the founding fathers of our nation, Thomas Paine, spoke words that apply to all of us gathered here today. They apply directly to all sitting here in this Hall. He said: 'We have it in our power to begin the world over again.'

﻿It is with particular pleasure that I congratulate you, Sir, and your country, Zambia, on your election as President of the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly. You have worked closely with Canadians since the start of your long years of dedication to the United Nations. We also value the many links between Zambia and Canada, one of the most rewarding being our shared membership in the Commonwealth. It was an enriching experience for me to visit Zambia in 1979 for the conference of Commonwealth Heads of Government.
43.	I should also like to welcome Brunei Darussalam, another fellow member of the Commonwealth, as the 159th Member of the United Nations.
44.	Eight days ago the Progressive Conservative Government of Canada assumed office. It is appropriate that the first foreign policy statement outside Canada by our new Government should be here at the United Nations. Like all countries, we have urgent problems at home, and we are determined to face them. But the basic reality of Canada is that we are open to the world; our economy responds to the international economy; our population comes from and connects with all continents and nations; the name of our capital city, Ottawa, is drawn from the Algonquin Indian word meaning 'a meeting-place', and our history is that of a community where different cultures and contesting interests can meet together. Ever since we have been a sovereign nation, our Governments and our people have tried to put our talents to work for the world. We shall continue in that spirit.
45.	Canada was active at the creation of the United Nations, and successive Canadian Governments, formed by different political parties, have consistently helped the Organization to meet its most difficult challenges. I come to this rostrum in the tradition of Howard Green of Canada, who struggled to achieve a partial test-ban treaty as a first step towards a comprehensive test ban; in the tradition of Lester Pearson, who inspired the concept of peace-keeping; and in the tradition of Paul Martin, who helped to end the log-am which had prevented the admission of new Member States in the early years of the United Nations. Canadians are proud of having contributed to the solution of problems such as those.
46.	In the nearly four decades since the Second World War, the international community has come to count on Canada as a moderating influence in a world beset by extremes. Our new Government is in the mainstream of this Canadian tradition and intends to build on it, consistently and pragmatically.
47.	We want to ensure that we are using our influence and defining our interests in ways which reflect the contemporary challenges facing Canada and the world. As a new Government should, we shall undertake a thorough and public review of Canadian foreign policy aimed at the creative renewal of a moderate and constructive Canadian role in the world. Citizens of Canada and friends of Canada will be encouraged to suggest how the Canadian international tradition can best be applied to the increasing tensions and interdependence of the modern world, including those of the nuclear age.
48.	The frightening facts of the nuclear arms race are well known. The super-Powers are developing new kinds of nuclear weapons, more countries are developing nuclear capacities, and the risk rises that terrorist groups could acquire nuclear devices. Physicians and scientists warn that even for survivors the world would be virtually uninhabitable after a major nuclear conflict. But far more threatening than the weaponry are the patterns into which the world has settled. Nuclear-arms-control negotiations between the super-Powers are at a standstill. This stalemate allows other nuclear States to claim impotence in the arms race and could encourage States without nuclear weapons to argue that they, too, have a right to acquire them.
49.	If these patterns continue and the path towards effective nuclear arms control remains blocked, the world will become infinitely more dangerous.
50.	We therefore welcome the meeting that will take place in Washington later this week between President Reagan and Foreign Minister Gromyko. We applaud the United States willingness, expressed so eloquently yesterday by President Reagan to engage in political consultations on a regular and frequent basis. We hope that the Soviet Union will respond positively to this opportunity to meet and to talk.
51.	On these questions, Canada's influence is limited but real. We have no corner on moral authority or technical expertise, but we do enjoy a reputation as a people who are serious about peace and skilled at mediation. Those qualities are critically important in reversing the ominous trends which threaten to unravel arms control. The essential problem today is not moral and it is not technical. Neither superpower wants a holocaust, and human ingenuity, which can invent weapons, can devise controls. The problem is political, and this is one of the forums in which we must work together to inch the world away from nuclear devastation.
52.	Some people despair of anything constructive being possible in the present state of international tension. They point to the recent lack of progress in virtually every area of arms control. The Canadian view is that something must be done and so it can be done.
53.	The major decisions rest with the super-Powers, but the responsibility rests with us all. Multilateral efforts, led and encouraged by the medium-sized and smaller countries, can help improve the atmosphere and can put specific, workable ideas on the agenda.
54.	Canada, for its part, is determined to continue to play a leading role in the search for peace and disarmament. We believe that the nuclear build-up threatens the life of every Canadian and that it threatens the existence of human society. Countries like our own must use their influence to reverse that build-up and reduce the danger of destruction. That will be a constant, consistent, dominant priority of Canadian foreign policy.
55.	My country is not neutral in the contest between open and closed societies. We defend and we actively assert the values of democracy and individual freedom. We believe it is essential to pursue the goals of peace and freedom simultaneously.
56.	We shall seek, through concrete and realistic steps, progress towards a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We shall encourage super-Power and multilateral discussion on all outer space weapons and shall commission further studies on how a space-weapons ban might be verified. We shall work for the success of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons next year, in order to prevent the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. We shall bring to bear our technical expertise in verification measures to ensure mutual confidence and security in areas where arms control agreements can be achieved. We shall encourage-age agreement on a mutual and balanced reduction of conventional forces in Europe, and hence reduce the danger of escalation to nuclear war. We shall continue to press for a verifiable convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons. Canada will continue its financial support of the World Disarmament Campaign. We shall, in addition, expect that the newly created Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security will contribute its share of studies and advice on specific arms control proposals and measures to reduce international tension.
57.	Since we are new in office, I speak today in more general terms than I shall on future occasions. The Prime Minister, Mr. Brian Mulroney, has said that our new Government 'will play a more active role in the United Nations and its agencies'.
58.	Our Government is unreservedly committed to the United Nations. We value our bilateral relations with other countries and our role in such associations as the Commonwealth and La Francophonie. These links are important, but they are not enough. Whether medium-sized Powers or smaller countries, we all need elective international institutions so that our voices may be heard in the world and so that we may face together the huge political and economic problems of our century. A dynamic and responsive United Nations system is essential for countries such as Canada—but also for the super-Powers. It is precisely because more communities adopt an introspective attitude that we must strengthen the world institutions that bring us together.
59.	In his reports on the work of the Organization over the past three years, the Secretary-General has tried to make us face up to our responsibilities as Member States. In his most recent report he asks this:
'Why has there been a retreat from internationalism and multilateralism at a time when actual developments both in relation to world peace and to the world economy would seem to demand their strengthening?'
60.	When are we going to start to answer his disquieting questions? Let us hope that it will not take a major disaster to jolt us out of our inertia.
61.	The eve of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations is a fitting occasion for each Member State to examine its commitment to the Charter of the United Nations. This anniversary must be marked by a renewal of commitments for the future, not merely by a celebration of the past.
62.	It is not enough to reaffirm our adherence to the Charter. Member States must work together actively to strengthen the United Nations system. The Secretary-General has expressed the hope that in each of our countries our best talents will be put to this task. Let us take up this challenge and establish the guidelines for this work.
63.	An unprecedented conference of 35 leading Canadians, sponsored by the United Nations Association in Canada, will take place on 26 October at Ottawa to launch a review of ways to strengthen the United Nations. The Prime Minister, Mr. Mulroney, and the Government intend also to ask Canadian parliamentarians to study this question and present formal recommendations.
64.	How can we translate the results of this soul- searching in each of our countries into collective action to strengthen the United Nations system in concrete ways?
65.	We should consider at this session, as a priority issue, how we, the 'friends of the United Nations', can identify and give effect to practical measures to strengthen the United Nations system.
66.	Any analysis of what is needed to strengthen the United Nations system must be based upon a realistic assessment of what has gone right and what has gone wrong.
67.	The first thing that has gone wrong is that the Security Council has become increasingly ineffective. We all recognize that the Council does not operate in a vacuum. It will continue to mirror world tensions.
But deteriorating relationships between its permanent members must not be allowed to immobilize the Council. We must immunize the Council to the extent that no matter what the crisis and whatever the state of relations among its members their representatives will continue to talk.
68.	Last year the members of the Security Council held a series of private meetings to discuss how to improve the effectiveness of the Council. But that exercise appears to have run out of steam. Even ideas which appear uncontroversial on the surface seem to have been ignored. Why, for example, cannot the members of the Council agree to hold regular sessions in camera, with the Secretary-General present, to review the Council's and the Secretary-General's roles in facilitating the solution of current, incipient or potential disputes? A reluctance to talk is no excuse. The Council, at least behind the scenes, must function as a multilateral hot-line.
69.	A second failing is that we have not lived up to our own responsibilities as States Members of the United Nations. We have expected the Secretary- General to fill the vacuum, without giving him adequate political support to do the job. We must allow the Secretary-General a greater margin of initiative and a greater independence of action. He has been able on his own to take action in some areas of United Nations activity. He has, for example, made a promising start in improving the management of the limited financial and human resources of the Organization. He has used a period of budgetary restraint to begin to weed out lower-priority activities. The Secretary-General has also been exerting a positive influence on many intractable international problems. But we must provide him with more political backing. He should be allowed and encouraged to increase his fact-finding capacity and his ability to exercise his good offices in particular situations.
70.	A third thing that has gone wrong is that too much valuable time and resources are being wasted throughout the United Nations system on extraneous political issues. We all accept the fact that the Security Council and the General Assembly are political forums, but even here we should avoid the repetition of sterile political debates, the proliferation of resolutions on the same topic and the scheduling of redundant conferences and meetings.
71.	We must also resist the over-politicization that is increasingly infecting the technical parts of the United Nations system, which are neither mandated nor equipped to handle such issues. It is naive to expect that a certain number of heated political issues will not be raised. However, it becomes debilitating when political issues begin to frustrate the normal give and take between groups in working out consensus on the essential activities of United Nations organizations. UNESCO, for example, has been a serious offender in recent years. We must step up the momentum to bring UNESCO back into balance.
72.	We must not permit challenges to the universality of membership to undermine the continued viability of the system. Israel, for example, must retain its right of membership in the United Nations family of organizations. The Republic of Korea deserves full membership in the United Nations.
73.	We must not, of course, allow any analysis of the things that have gone wrong to obscure the many things that have gone right within the United Nations system. We often take for granted the many parts of the system which are continuing to function well. I shall cite only a few examples.
74.	First, most of the United Nations specialized agencies are continuing to carry out their mandates with distinction and with dedication. ICAO, as a case in point, was able last spring to approve unanimously an amendment to its Constitution to make even clearer the existing prohibition against using force against civil aircraft.
75.	Secondly, in human rights the distance still to go and the double standards still at play cannot obscure the step-by-step progress which has been made. All those who cherish human rights have been heartened by the election of a Government of Argentina committed to the restoration of human rights. Canada hopes that at this session of the General Assembly the next important international milestone in human rights will be passed by the adoption of the draft convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. We must send a message to the world that torture is unacceptable to civilized nations.
76.	Thirdly, the United Nations development activities and humanitarian assistance continue to be irreplaceable. In 1984, UNDP will generate about $1 billion in technical assistance to developing countries, using the parts of the United Nations system as executing agencies. UNICEF makes a vital contribution to meeting the development and humanitarian needs of mothers and of children. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNRWA co-ordinate essential humanitarian assistance to refugees.
77.	Fourthly, the United Nations system is also helping to focus upon the most persistent social issues facing society. The designation by the United Nations of 1985 as International Youth Year has encouraged many countries such as Canada to develop a comprehensive national programme in this Held. The International Conference on Population, held at Mexico City from 6 to 14 August 1984, has strengthened the momentum generated on population issues over the last decade and identified emerging problems of global concern. The World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women, to be held at Nairobi next July, will provide an opportunity to develop forward-looking strategies to stimulate positive changes in the lives of women.
78.	Fifthly, under the auspices of the United Nations system, positive and often innovative legal regimes have been established in such critical fields as the law of the sea, trade, outer space, civil aviation, telecommunications and the environment. The progressive extension of the rule of law is fundamental to the whole multilateral system.
79.	The record is much less positive in the area of peace and security. We can do more to make creative use of the machinery under the Charter of the United Nations to facilitate the peaceful settlement of specific disputes.
80.	My Government wants the independence, sovereignty and genuine non-alignment of Afghanistan restored and foreign forces withdrawn from that battered country. We support the continued efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Representative to accomplish this.
81.	We support the countries members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations [ASEAN] in their efforts to bring peace to the unfortunate country of Kampuchea, which continues to be occupied unlawfully.
82.	Canada regrets the extension to Central America of East-West confrontation and the related militarization of the area. We applaud the initiative, skill and tenacity of the countries of the Contadora Group in their efforts to build a framework of reconciliation in the spirit of the Charter. We also welcome the opening of a direct dialogue between the United States and Nicaragua.
83.	We need a negotiated settlement to end the suffering and destruction of the war between Iran and Iraq. We support the Secretary-General in building upon his recent success in obtaining the agreement of the belligerents to cease attacks on civilian population centres. His sending of a team to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons was also a useful action.
84.	Canada hopes that the current efforts of the Government of Lebanon to restore peace and stability in that tragic country will be rewarded. We support Lebanon's territorial integrity and maintain that all foreign troops should withdraw unless present at the request of the Lebanese Government. Canadians have been appalled by the latest act of terrorism in which so many people were killed and wounded at the United States Embassy in Beirut.
85.	We strongly support a just and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli dispute based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which provides for the right of all States, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized boundaries. We also support the realization of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their right to a homeland within a clearly defined territory, the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
86.	We should remind ourselves that United Nations peace-keeping forces and observer missions continue to be essential in a number of troubled areas of the world. All Member States have a responsibility to contribute to the support of these operations. In particular, we ask Member States to respond positively to the appeal by the Secretary-General for additional voluntary contributions to UNFICYP. While peace-keeping forces can help to reduce the risk of open conflict, lasting peace can be achieved only through reasonable political compromise. In that spirit, we applaud the constructive participation of the leaders of the two Cypriot communities in the proximity talks held during the last two weeks under the auspices of the Secretary-General. We welcome the announced renewal of those exchanges next month, and we urge the parties to seize this opportunity for progress towards a just and lasting settlement.
87.	We are all painfully aware that political and economic forces now at play in the global environment are interrelated. It is worth asking: What is the record of the multilateral system on the economic front?
88.	The debt crisis has severely afflicted many developing countries. The effects of severe indebtedness on the economic prospects of so many developing countries, on the well-being of their peoples and on the health of the international financial system as a whole must remain a major 
preoccupation of the international community. Continued efforts will be required by the industrialized countries to ensure that the recovery strengthens and persists and spreads to all countries, developed and developing alike.
89.	Canada will support expanding multilateral efforts to stabilize the debt situation, in line with the decision of major industrialized countries, at the London Economic Summit, held from 7 to 9 June 1984, to confirm their strategy on debt and to implement and develop it flexibly case by case. The Commonwealth, too, has been doing important work in this area. My colleague, the Minister of Finance of Canada, was invited by Commonwealth Finance Ministers, at Toronto last week, to recommend to this week's annual meeting of the World Bank and the IMF that issues of special importance to developing countries, including debt, be placed on the agenda of the next meeting of the Development Committee. I am encouraged by the agreement of the Interim and Development Committees, in Washington over the weekend, to devote special attention at their meetings next spring to such matters as debt, adjustment and financial flows in the medium-term perspective.
90.	The courageous adjustment efforts of many developing countries must be continued, but it is also important that adequate financing be provided by the international community. In this respect, the important role that could be played by private investment should not be overlooked.
91.	As a country heavily dependent on foreign trade and foreign investment, my Government is pledged to maintain close co-operation with its economic partners and to uphold the principles of the open and just multilateral system under which all countries, developed and developing, can prosper. Effective multilateral institutions are essential to prevent parochial responses to economic problems that require common action.
92.	National and international action will be needed to stem protectionist tendencies, which are still strong and could threaten trade prospects. The major Western industrialized countries rededicated themselves at the London Economic Summit to resist protectionist pressures and to accelerate the work programme of GATT. Our collective ability to fulfil these pledges and to move towards a new round of multilateral trade negotiations will be critical in halting the erosion of the open trading system and ensuring that trade shall continue to be one of the motors of growth in the world economy. Developing countries, as well, must play their full role in this process.
93.	Meanwhile, there are the urgent questions of human suffering that must be addressed. Our new Government intends to maintain Canada's commitment to reach by 1990 the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product in official development assistance. Despite serious economic problems at home, we shall not turn our backs on the world's disadvantaged peoples. A greater share of our aid budget will be spent by non-governmental organizations, which have proved their effectiveness in community development programmes.
94.	The record of the international community on economic issues is one of achievement, although it is far from perfect. We must ensure that the specialized institutions that we have created shall prove capable of coping with current and future challenges. There is growing support for a pragmatic, issue-oriented approach. Organizations such as the IMF/World Bank, GATT, UNCTAD and others which have specific mandates within the multilateral system are being encouraged to get on with their jobs with a renewed sense of commitment and co-operation.
95.	As the Secretary-General has emphasized, no-where is human need greater today than in Africa, where many countries face drought and starvation. The problem of refugees remains of special concern there. So do the debt and balance-of-payments problems. This year Canada is devoting over 40 per cent of bilateral aid to Africa. We have sharply increased our food allocations and raised our contributions to humanitarian relief organizations.
96.	The struggle for freedom and equality in southern Africa is also our common cause. Canada joined with other Commonwealth countries in adopting the 1979 Lusaka Declaration of the Commonwealth on Racism and Racial Prejudice. We stand by that Declaration, which reflects our commitment to work for the eradication of the evil of racism. We reject policies designed to perpetuate apartheid and continue racial discrimination.
97.	We are also grieved that the people of Namibia are still denied their independence after a century of colonial rule. South Africa must set a date to implement Namibia's independence under Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
98.	I speak here today as a Foreign Minister conscious of the frustrations of the United Nations and the limits on its actions. But I first encountered the United Nations as an idea, not an institution—an idea that reached into the comfortable comer of the world where I was born, let me know that famine and war and disease were part of daily life in most of the world, and' gave me hope that there was a way we could fight those evils. Viewed from that perspective, the United Nations can be judged not by volumes of repetitive debates but by the millions of children who are fed and clothed and are living; the wars that were averted or limited or postponed; the hundreds of millions of human lives that have been protected or improved because the idea of the United Nations connects people who can help with people who need help.
99.	The idea of the United Nations is as important now as at any time in our history. It forces the comfortable out of complacency. It lifts the desperate beyond despair. It allows today's frustrations to be seen in the light of four decades of lives improved, conflicts reduced, perspectives enlarged.
100.	Support for the United Nations must be based on a clear-sighted view of current realities. When we list the things that have gone wrong with the United Nations, we should not forget the things that have gone right, and when we rejoice in the things that have gone right, we often underestimate the political and economic problems that lie ahead. We must avoid the trap of blaming the United Nations for our own sins and omissions. If we collectively are unable to revitalize the United Nations system, we shall have to resign ourselves to watching it wither away. That must not happen.
101.	The year 1985, the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, can be a turning-point in the life of the Organization. A broad coalition of 'friends of the United Nations' must join forces to renew the effectiveness of global institutions. My Government will do its utmost, working with other States and with the Secretary-General, to make these institutions flourish. This is the fortieth birthday present our peoples deserve. Let us prove that life begins at forty.
102.	Last week in Canada, Pope John Paul II called for 'a new vision of humanity' to inspire nations and individuals in the pursuit of peace and well- being for all. He asked Canadians to do more. Let us all do more.
It is
a privilege to speak to the General Assembly today on
behalf of the United States.
A half-century ago the General Assembly first met
here in New York, across the river in a converted skating
rink at Flushing Meadows. In those modest surroundings
our predecessors began to put in place an ambitious
framework that they hoped would keep the peace as
successfully as they had prosecuted the war.
In the years since, the United Nations has helped
bring peace, prosperity and hope to countless people
around the world. Technological change has brought
nations closer together than the founders of the United
9


Nations could possibly have foreseen. The United Nations
itself has been challenged in unforeseen ways. It has had to
manage complex humanitarian emergencies, from civil wars
to mass movements of refugees to health epidemics. This
evolution has placed great strains on the Organization and
has revealed the necessity for far-reaching changes in how
it is run.
The Clinton Administration has vigorously made the
case to our Congress and our people for continued
American leadership at the United Nations. The United
States made a commitment to the United Nations Charter
50 years ago, and we are determined to keep our
commitment, including our financial obligations.
We will always remember that for millions of people
around the world, the United Nations is far from a faceless
institution. It is, as Harry Truman once said,
“a case of food, a box of school books; it is a doctor
who vaccinates children; it is an expert who shows
people how to raise more rice and more wheat.”
To millions more around the world, it is the difference
between peace and war.
Economic and social development, as well as the
protection of human rights, remain central to the United
Nations mission. But the United Nations must change to
meet new needs more effectively. When money is wasted
in New York, Geneva or Vienna, when time is lost in
bureaucratic inertia, the people who pay the price are those
most vulnerable to famine, disease and violence.
It is time to recognize that the United Nations must
direct its limited resources to the world’s highest priorities,
focusing on the tasks that it performs the best. The United
Nations bureaucracy should be smaller, with a clear
organizational structure and sharp lines of responsibility.
Each programme must be held to a single simple standard:
it must make a tangible contribution to the freedom,
security and well-being of real people in the real world.
In the last year, under the leadership of Secretary-
General Boutros-Ghali, the groundwork for substantial
change has been laid. The United Nations has an office
with the functions of an inspector general and a mandate to
crack down on waste and fraud. Under-Secretary-General
Joe Connor has embarked on an aggressive campaign to
improve the United Nations management culture, and we
fully support his good work. The United Nations Secretariat
has moved in the right direction by submitting a budget that
begins to restrain spending, and now this momentum for
reform must accelerate.
Let me propose a brief, concrete agenda for reform.
First, we must end United Nations programmes that
have achieved their purpose, and we must consolidate
programmes that overlap, especially in the economic and
social agencies. The United Nations has more than a
dozen organizations responsible for development,
emergency response and statistical reporting. We should
consider establishing a single agency for each of these
functions. We should downsize the United Nations
regional economic commissions. We should ensure that
the functions of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development do not duplicate those of the new
World Trade Organization (WTO), and we should adopt
a moratorium on big United Nations conferences once the
present series is completed, concentrating instead on
meeting the commitments of those conferences that we
have already held.
Secondly, we need to streamline the United Nations
Secretariat to make it more efficient, accountable and
transparent. Each part of the United Nations system
should be subject to the scrutiny of an inspector general.
The United Nations must not tolerate ethical or financial
abuses, and its managers should be appointed and
promoted on the basis of merit.
Thirdly, we should rigorously scrutinize proposals
for new and extended peace-keeping missions, and we
should improve the United Nations ability to respond
rapidly when new missions are approved. We must agree
on an equitable scale of peace-keeping assessments that
reflects fully today’s economic realities. And we should
have a unified budget for peace-keeping operations.
Finally, we must maintain the effectiveness of the
Security Council. Germany and Japan should become
permanent members, and we should ensure that all the
world’s regions are fairly represented, without making the
Council too large and unwieldy.
We welcome the formation of the high-level group
on reform, initiated under the leadership of the outgoing
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Essy. Our goal
must be that of a practical blueprint for United Nations
reform and to ensure that it is adopted before the General
Assembly finishes the work of its fiftieth session next
fall. The way forward is clear; we have already seen and
10


studied countless studies and reports. Now the time has
come to act on the best proposals.
As the Assembly knows, in my country there have
been serious efforts to curtail our support for the United
Nations. The President and I, and our entire Administration,
believe it would be reckless to turn away from an
Organization that helps mobilize the support of other
nations for goals that are consistent with American and
global interests. But to sustain support for the United
Nations among the American people and among the people
of other nations, it is not enough that we defend the
institution. The best argument against retreat is further
reform. Tangible progress in that direction will help us win
the battle for United Nations support that we are waging in
the United States.
The United Nations must emerge from the reform
process better able to meet its fundamental goals, including
the preservation of peace and security. From Korea to the
Persian Gulf to Haiti, the United Nations has provided a
mandate to its Members as they carried out their
responsibilities. The United Nations own Blue Helmets
have helped nations create the basic conditions of peace in
some of the most difficult situations imaginable around the
world, even though they have not always achieved their
intended purpose.
Recently, a young Haitian father was asked what the
peace-keeping forces had achieved in his country. He
answered,
“We walk freely. We sleep quietly. There are no
men who come for us in the night.”
In Haiti, as, for example, in Cambodia, Mozambique and El
Salvador, the United Nations has shown that peace-keeping,
despite its limitations, has been an enormously useful
instrument.
One region where United Nations forces and the
international community have played a critical role is the
Middle East. Another historic milestone will be marked this
Thursday, in Washington, when Israel and the Palestinians
sign their agreement to implement phase two of the
Declaration of Principles. That agreement will bring to life
a goal first set many years ago in the Camp David accords:
to protect Israel’s security and to give Palestinians
throughout the West Bank control over their daily lives.
The international community and the United Nations must
continue to support this process, both diplomatically and
economically.
There is no question that the United Nations has
never undertaken a mission more difficult than the one in
the former Yugoslavia. The limitations of that mission are
all too well known, but we all must recognize that it has
provided relief for hundreds of thousands of people and
has saved literally thousands of lives. Today, diplomacy
backed by force has given the United States and the
international community an opportunity to move forward
on a track that is producing genuinely hopeful results. The
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) are working effectively together to
try to bring peace to the region. On 8 September in
Geneva, the parties to the conflict accepted the
fundamental goal that the Security Council has often
expressed: the continuation of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single State within its internationally
recognized borders. I will be meeting with the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia later today, and
at that time I will urge them — implore them — to
maintain the momentum towards peace and to establish
constitutional structures for Bosnia.
The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
created this institution to meet threats to peace and
security posed by aggression and armed conflict. Those
threats are still, unfortunately, very much with us. But
today, the world also faces a new set of security
challenges, including proliferation, terrorism, international
crime and narcotics, as well as the far-reaching
consequences of damage to the environment. These have
assumed a new and dangerous scope in a more
interdependent world. As President Clinton said in San
Francisco in June, the
“new forces of integration carry within them the
seeds of disintegration and destruction”.
While, as I said earlier, new technologies have
brought us closer together, they also have made it easier
for terrorists, drug dealers and other international
criminals to acquire weapons of mass destruction, to set
up cocaine cartels and to hide their ill-gotten gains. The
collapse of communism has shattered dictatorships, to be
sure, but it has also left the political and legal institutions
of newly liberated nations even more vulnerable to those
who seek to subvert them.
Although these threats are sometimes sponsored by
States, they increasingly follow no flag. Each of us must
vigorously fight these enemies on our own, but we will
never be truly secure until we effectively fight them
together. That is the new security challenge for the global
11


community, and it must be the new security mission for the
United Nations.
There is no single area in which the United Nations
can make a more significant contribution than in that of
non-proliferation. Fifty years ago, the United States was the
only country capable of making a nuclear bomb. Today
many countries have the technology that would enable them
to turn a fist-sized chunk of plutonium into a bomb as
small as a suitcase. That is one reason why more than 170
nations agreed, at a conference held here last May and
effectively chaired by Ambassador Dhanapala, to extend for
all time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is an achievement we must rejoice in but
also build on.
I should like to outline some steps in the field of
non-proliferation. First, we should have a comprehensive
test-ban treaty ready for signature by the time we meet here
next September. As President Clinton announced last
month, the United States is committed to a true zero-yield
test ban. We urge other nations to join us in that
commitment.
Secondly, we should immediately start negotiations on
a fissile material cut-off treaty. Those who have been most
vocal in calling for nuclear disarmament should recognize
that it is essential to ban future production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, we should push forward with the historic
reductions of the nuclear arsenals of the United States and
countries of the former Soviet Union. I call on the United
States Senate, as well as on the Russian Duma, to approve
the treaty on further reduction and limitation of strategic
offensive arms (START II) so that we can lock in deep cuts
in our strategic nuclear arsenals. In addition, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin are working together to ensure the
safety, transparency and irreversibility of nuclear-arms
reductions.
As part of this process, President Yeltsin will host a
nuclear safety and security summit in Moscow next spring.
This summit should have a very ambitious agenda,
including a declaration of principles on nuclear safety. We
look to this summit to address the worldwide problems of
nuclear-waste management, including those of ocean
dumping. The summit should also promote a plan of action
to safeguard nuclear materials, a plan that should include
new measures to prevent criminals and terrorists from
acquiring nuclear materials for use in weapons.
Finally, we should push for the earliest possible
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
President Clinton has urged the United States Senate to
act promptly on its ratification, and to stop holding the
START II Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention
hostage to unrelated issues. The world has witnessed the
effects of poison gas too many times in this century — on
European battlefields during the First World War, in
Ethiopia and Manchuria during the 1930s, and against
Iranian soldiers and innocent Kurdish civilians in the
1980s. The Chemical Weapons Convention will make
every nation safer, and we need it now.
The United Nations is also playing an invaluable
role in focusing attention on pressing regional
proliferation problems. In Iraq, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and its Chairman, Rolf Ekeus,
continue to uncover horrific details about Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction.
Under Saddam Hussein, Iraq developed a deadly
biological-weapons capacity hidden from view. It was
conducting research to turn some of the most toxic
substances known to man into weapons of war. We know
that Saddam succeeded in putting anthrax and botulism in
bombs and missile warheads. In December 1990, he
deployed these weapons, with every intention of using
them against the international coalition and innocent
civilians. He was dissuaded from doing so only by the
steadfast determination of the United States and the
international community.
In the light of what Ambassador Ekeus has
uncovered in Iraq, we can conclude only that for the last
four and a half years, Saddam Hussein has lied about the
full scope of Iraq’s weapons programmes. There should
be no easing of the sanctions regime against Iraq until its
Government complies with all the demands of the
Security Council and clearly demonstrates that it has
changed its ways.
The United Nations should also promote
responsibility and restraint in the transfer of conventional
weapons. At last year’s session of the General Assembly,
President Clinton proposed, and the Assembly approved,
the eventual elimination of anti-personnel mines. On my
recent trip to Cambodia, I saw the terrible damage these
hidden killers can do. This year, we will again call on
other countries to join us in putting an end to the export
of land-mines.
12


Two years ago, President Clinton called on the
international community to devise a true international
system governing the transfer of conventional weapons and
sensitive dual-use technologies. I am pleased that the
Russian Federation has joined with the United States and 26
other countries to agree on a common principle to control
the build-up of dangerous conventional arms. We hope to
activate this global regime, which is called the New Forum,
by the end of this year.
The proliferation of weapons worldwide has added a
disturbing dimension to another threat we all face: the
threat of international terrorism. Indeed, this year’s sarin
gas attack in Tokyo is a grim warning of what can happen
when terrorists acquire weapons of mass destruction.
More nations are joining the fight against those
individuals and groups that attack civilians for political
ends. The United Nations has supported this effort in
important ways. The Security Council recognized the
importance of countering State-sponsored terrorism by
imposing sanctions against Libya for the bombing of Pan
Am 103 and UTA 772.
Terrorists must be treated as criminals and there must
be no place where they can hide from the consequences of
their acts. States that sponsor terrorists should feel the full
weight of sanctions that can be imposed by the international
community. Let us not deceive ourselves: every dollar that
goes into the Government coffers of a State-sponsor of
terrorism such as Iran helps pay for a terrorist’s bullets or
bombs. Iran’s role as the foremost State-sponsor of
terrorism makes its secret quest for weapons of mass
destruction even more alarming. We must stand together to
prevent Iran from acquiring such threatening capabilities.
The United States has taken a leading role in meeting
the international terrorist threat. We have intensified our
sanctions against Iran. Last January President Clinton issued
an Executive Order prohibiting financial transactions with
terrorist groups and individuals that threaten the Middle
East peace process. We are urging our Congress to tighten
our immigration and criminal laws to keep terrorists on the
run or put them behind bars.
The United States strongly supports the counter-
terrorism measures the G-7 and Russia announced at the
Halifax Summit, and we expect the G-8 Ministerial Meeting
on Terrorism in Ottawa to produce a concrete-action plan
to implement these measures that were adopted at the
Halifax Summit.
Other kinds of international crime also threaten the
safety of our citizens and the fabric of our societies. And
globalization brings new and frightening dimensions to
crime. The threat of crime is a particular menace to
young democracies. It weakens confidence in institutions,
preys on the most vulnerable in our societies and
undermines free-market reform.
Of course, every country must take its own measures
to combat these criminal threats. The Administration that
I represent is now completing a review of our approach
to transnational crime, a review that will lead to a
stronger, more coordinated attack on this problem.
To help other States deal with criminal threats, the
United States and Hungary have created the International
Law Enforcement Academy in Budapest to train police
officers and law-enforcement officials from Central
Europe and the States of the former Soviet Union. We are
providing similar help bilaterally, and through the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, to those
countries whose laws are challenged by international drug
cartels.
A particularly insidious form of crime and corruption
is money-laundering. All nations should work together to
implement the recommendations of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to
attack this insidious money-laundering. The nations of this
hemisphere should also advance the anti-money-
laundering initiative introduced at last December’s
Summit of the Americas. Together, we must work to
squeeze the dirty money out of the global financial
system.
Through the United Nations conventions on drugs
and crime the international community has set strong
standards that we must now act to enforce. We call on
Member States which have not already joined the 1988
drug Convention to do so promptly, and we call on those
countries which have approved the Convention to move
quickly to implement its important provisions.
We are also increasingly aware that damage to the
environment and unsustainable population growth threaten
the security of our nations and the well-being of our
peoples. Their harmful effects are evident in famines,
infant mortality rates, refugee crises, and ozone depletion.
In places like Rwanda and Somalia, for example, they
contribute to civil wars and emergencies that can be
resolved only by extremely costly international
intervention. We must carry out the commitments we
13


made last year at the Cairo Conference, as well as the
important commitments made at the Rio Conference three
years ago.
Never have our problems around the world been more
complex. It has never been more evident that these
problems affect all nations, developed and developing alike.
Only by working together can we effectively deal with the
new threats we all face that I have outlined here today.
That is why in this fiftieth anniversary year we must
shape the United Nations agenda as if we were creating the
institution anew. Just as the founders of the United Nations
devised a new framework to deter aggression and armed
conflict, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must now assign the same priority to combating
the threat posed by proliferation, by terrorism, by
international crime, by narcotics and by environmental
pollution. We should dedicate our efforts in the United
Nations and elsewhere to turning our global consensus
against these threats into concrete and effective action. We
must renew and reform the United Nations not for its sake,
but for our own.
It is a great honour to represent
Canada here today as we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary
of the United Nations during this general debate.
Canada has always been among the strongest
supporters of the United Nations, not only in word but
also in deed. In 1945 we were, through Canadian Prime
Minister Mackenzie King, an original signatory of the
United Nations Charter. Ambassador John Humphreys
helped write the 1948 United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Successive Canadian
Ambassadors to the United Nations have distinguished
themselves in the service of the Organization, as have
countless Canadian negotiators in areas ranging from
disarmament to trade to development. In addition, Lester
B. Pearson won a Nobel Peace Prize for his contribution
to the success of the United Nations in establishing the
first peace-keeping operation, in 1956.
All these Canadians had a unifying purpose: to
promote progress in implementing the United Nations
Charter, which enshrines the commitment of the people of
the United Nations to the advancement of humanity.
Of course, there have been criticisms of the
Organization; many are legitimate and require attention.
It is clear, however, that the international community
remains committed to the goals of the Charter and to the
United Nations as the primary instrument for global
problem solving.
The United Nations deserves our continued support.
If we look at the record of just the last few years, the
United Nations has conducted successful peace-keeping
operations in Cambodia, Mozambique and Haiti. Thanks
to the United Nations, in this decade alone 5 million
children will grow up normally, children who would
otherwise have been paralysed by polio. This year the
United Nations is working, as it does every year, to
ensure a better life for the almost 23 million refugees in
the world.
Global resolve to support the United Nations and to
advance the interests of the international community has
recently been underscored by such successes as the
indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. At the Halifax Summit in June,
chaired by our Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, the P-8
(Political Eight) leaders reaffirmed their strong
commitment to the United Nations system of international
institutions and added their ideas for revitalizing it.
The central message is clear: we must take this
momentous opportunity to confirm and renew our
commitment to the United Nations. To do so, we require
a renewed vision for the next 50 years. This vision must
5


be centred on not just striving for, but achieving, human
security on the basis of the freedom of people everywhere
to live in peace and without fear, to be prosperous and
enjoy equality, justice before the law and knowledge. The
Members of the United Nations must work together now to
renew the Organization and its agencies and programmes
and to help make this vision a reality.
In Canada’s view pursuing this vision requires a focus
on three interlinked objectives: preventing conflict;
responding quickly when conflict occurs; and supporting
peace-building efforts on an ongoing basis. I will address
each objective in turn.
(spoke in French)
The first priority must be to help the United Nations
better protect people from conflict. The United Nations has
had important successes in the past few years but,
unfortunately, there have also been set-backs. If the United
Nations is to adapt to a changing world, if confidence in
the Organization is to be restored, we must learn from the
failures of Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda and build on the
successes of Cambodia, Namibia and El Salvador.
Preventive action, as the Secretary-General has laid
out so well in “An Agenda for Peace”, takes many forms,
from economic development programmes to mediation, to
the preventive deployment of personnel — as, for example,
in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia — from
the investigation of human rights violations to the
conclusion of agreements limiting the spread of weapons of
mass destruction. Prevention saves lives, forestalls untold
human suffering and makes the best use of limited
resources.
Last year I announced at this podium that Canada was
providing a list of Canadian experts available to the United
Nations for preventive diplomacy missions. We are also
taking advantage of our membership in La Francophonie,
in the Commonwealth and in regional organizations such as
the Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) precisely in order to work towards enhancing the
ability of these organizations to prevent conflicts. Our
Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, is currently pressing for an
expanded Commonwealth role in democratization and good
governance, which are two key elements of conflict
prevention. I recently convened a meeting of La
Francophonie in Ottawa to generate recommendations for
it to strengthen its role in conflict prevention, particularly
in Africa. These recommendations will be presented to the
leaders, the Heads of State and Government, gathered at
the Francophone Summit to be held in Cotonou, Benin, in
December of this year.
Prevention also means deterring crimes against
humanity. Canada strongly supports the early
establishment of an international criminal court, which
will, we hope, deter such crimes in the future but, should
they occur, would punish the perpetrators. The recently
approved Platform for Action at the United Nations
Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing lends
further impetus in this area.
Our recent experiences in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda emphasize the link between security and
human rights. The United Nations many human rights
mechanisms produce a wealth of information that could
help us identify and understand potential areas of conflict.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has a role to play in enhancing the early warning
functions of the United Nations. The experience of the
Human Rights Field Operation in Rwanda revealed the
need for the more effective coordination of United
Nations field missions. Canada has commissioned work
on the human rights components of field operations and
on stand-by arrangements for them. This work will yield
recommendations on ways to integrate human rights into
United Nations field operations, in a way consistent with
the approach outlined in “An Agenda for Peace”.
One of the priorities of Canada’s foreign policy and
one of the best ways to renew commitment to the United
Nations consists of adopting a coherent approach to the
prevention and management of complex emergencies.
Averting crisis requires more flexibility and speed in
decision-making and in implementation. In this regard
Canada supports the proposal for a conference on
security, stability and development in the Great Lakes
region of Central Africa. We also reaffirm our strong
support for the United Nations Department of
Humanitarian Affairs.
(spoke in English)
Another major focus of Canada’s preventive action
is arms control and disarmament, especially concerning
nuclear weapons. The historic decision to extend the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) indefinitely provides a foundation for further
important gains on nuclear disarmament. We must now
complete the comprehensive test-ban treaty negotiations
as early as possible in 1996 in order to permit its
6


signature at the General Assembly next September. An
agreement to begin negotiations on a treaty to ban the
production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons is
currently held up. We squander such opportunities at our
peril. Canada calls on all members of the Conference on
Disarmament to proceed urgently with the cut-off
negotiations.
Regrettably our efforts to take preventive action are
eroded by the continued global imbalance between spending
on armaments and spending on human development.
Multilateral institutions should take trends in military and
other unproductive spending into consideration. All States
Members of the United Nations should comply with the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms which will,
we hope, be expanded soon to include military holdings and
national procurement activities. Together, interested
countries could develop criteria to identify excessive
military expenditures and appropriate international
responses. Canada has taken some initiatives in this regard
in recent months and we look forward to productive
negotiations with many Member States here.
When a United Nations preventive diplomacy
operation stumbles and efforts to prevent conflict fail,
Member States all too often criticize the United Nations.
But much of the blame for the failures of the Organization
lies with the Member States themselves who do not provide
it with the tools needed for success. These tools are never
needed more than when a crisis erupts.
Last year I discussed the problems the United Nations
has encountered in mobilizing its peace operations to
respond to crises. Canada’s long experience with peace-
keeping has convinced us that improvements are possible.
The international community’s slow response to the horrible
and deeply distressing events in Rwanda was very much in
our mind. It was in this context that I announced that
Canada would examine ways to improve the capacity of the
United Nations to react quickly to such events.
Today I have the honour of presenting to the
Assembly Canada’s report entitled “Towards a Rapid
Reaction Capability for the United Nations” as a special
Canadian contribution to the United Nations during its
fiftieth anniversary year. It presents practical proposals for
enhancing the United Nations rapid reaction capability in
the field of peace operations. I believe the proposals will
both help save lives and conserve scarce resources.
The report expresses the view of the Government of
Canada, but considerable care was taken to consult with
other Governments, non-governmental organizations and
intergovernmental institutions. We are also deeply grateful
to the many experts from many countries who have lent
us their time and wisdom.
The main proposal of the report is the 'Vanguard
Concept'. This concept will permit the United Nations to
assemble, from Member States, a multifunctional force of
up to 5,000 military and civilian personnel, and, with the
authorization of the Security Council, quickly deploy it
under the control of an operational-level headquarters.
This operational headquarters would be responsible for
the advance preparations that are crucial if rapid reaction
is to work. Forces will be provided under enhanced stand-
by arrangements with Member States. Our other proposals
seek to enhance training, to create more efficient logistics
and transportation, and to strengthen the planning efforts
of the entire United Nations system. Let me say that none
of the 26 recommendations in the report requires Charter
reforms.
But the search for immediate, practical solutions
must not preclude more visionary possibilities. In this
regard, the report looked at longer-term questions, such as
advanced technology in support of the United Nations
peace operations, the feasibility of a permanent group of
civilian police, the idea of a United Nations Standing
Emergency Group, a permanent force as has been
considered by our colleague from the Netherlands; and
the question of independent sources of revenue for the
United Nations system.
(spoke in French)
I believe that the recommendations in the report, if
implemented, will strengthen the United Nations capacity
for more rapid, effective and successful peace operations.
They will help restore confidence in the ability of the
United Nations to respond to crises.
We are conscious of the fact that words are not
enough. In the words of a former military adviser to the
United Nations:
“We can’t deploy studies.”
For Canada this report is only the first step in
translating ideas into action. To meet the growing need
for civilian personnel during crises, Canada will offer the
United Nations secondment or the loan of civilian
personnel on a short-term urgent basis to help in the
development of a fully trained capacity in the areas of
7


human rights, legal advice, humanitarian assistance, and
other aspects of a rapid civilian response to crises.
Last week Canada sent the Secretary-General an
updated inventory of Canadian personnel and equipment on
stand-by to the United Nations, including technical
information that would be crucial to rapid response. We are
now prepared to negotiate with the United Nations a more
detailed memorandum of understanding on stand-by
arrangements, which would include more information on
readiness and capability standards.
Our report devotes special attention to the creation of
an operational-level headquarters as the heart of the
“Vanguard” concept. Canada is prepared to help in
establishing its headquarters should the United Nations
decide to accept this recommendation. We have already
made a significant number of military personnel available
to the United Nations on secondment or on loan. We are
prepared to make available additional personnel, both
civilian and military, in order to bring this idea closer to
realization.
The time for moving towards fundamental
improvements in the way the United Nations responds to
crises is now. A number of countries have advanced
proposals similar to Canada’s and there are many new and
interesting proposals for change coming also from the non-
governmental sector.
Follow-up is of key importance. We need to marshal
our energies, to determine the most promising areas of
action, and to move quickly towards putting words into
action. Over the coming weeks and months, Canada intends
to work closely with like-minded countries from around the
world, and, of course, with the United Nations Secretariat
to this end.
The ongoing work of peace-building must continue
alongside preventive diplomacy and now rapid reaction
operations. Indeed, peace-building involves a wide range of
activities. Much of the work needed for articulating a broad
vision of human security has already been done in the
series of United Nations conferences in the economic and
social fields, culminating in the Platform for Action
recently adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Women. It sets out a comprehensive view of sustainable
development, which balances economic and social agendas
for the purpose of promoting the well-being of society. This
global consensus offers an opportunity to restore confidence
in the work of the United Nations system in these fields,
and to dispel the perception of aimlessness and drift. The
United Nations can continue to play an invaluable role in
forging global agreements on development goals, in
advocating core values, and in responding to humanitarian
and development needs.
We must seek to anchor change in a commitment to
people-centred sustainable development. A strong
emphasis must be placed on the reduction of poverty and
on the integration of the poorest countries into the world
economy. However, no single country, or even group of
countries, can achieve global results alone. We are,
therefore, determined to work with all Member States to
pursue these goals sufficiently and effectively. Let me
take this opportunity to set out some ideas on the way to
renew commitment to the economic and social work of
the United Nations.
First, there is a need to achieve the right balance
between wide-ranging debate and decisions on which
programmes should be adopted. The justified breadth of
debate does not mean that United Nations programs
should be established to address every problem. There are
many other actors who play important roles. The United
Nations should focus on what it is uniquely equipped to
achieve.
Secondly, there is a need for a fresh sense of the
real goals of development. The outcomes of the major
conferences are at the core, and their distillation and
coordinated follow-up should be a touchstone for the
United Nations in the economic and social fields.
The roles and functions of organizations and
agencies should be examined and refocused to ensure that
they are oriented to future needs. The Agenda for
Development is an important opportunity to initiate the
institutional change required.
Improving cooperation with and among specialized
agencies is essential to give limited resources some
impact. The Economic and Social Council must take more
responsibility for policy coordination within the United
Nations system. A start was made this summer in Geneva.
The recent establishment of the United Nations
Programme on AIDS is a promising example. There, the
executive heads of agencies and programmes must
demonstrate leadership, particularly in coordinating the
follow-up to international conferences and ensuring that
duplication, overlapping and needless spending are
eliminated as far as possible.
8


We must effectively harness the complementary roles
of the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions.
To ensure a smooth transition from emergencies to
rehabilitation, improved cooperation in crises must be an
immediate priority. I urge the Secretary-General and the
leaders of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) to propose new arrangements for post-crisis
assistance. They could also establish a high-level working
group to consider how to strengthen cooperation, both at
the Organization’s Headquarters and elsewhere, in areas
such as data collection, analysis and reporting. The World
Trade Organization (WTO) should also participate in
relevant aspects of this work.
We have all come to understand the extent to which
human security is indivisible from environmental security.
More and more conflicts are arising following disagreement
over the use of finite natural resources. The United Nations
therefore has a key role to play in promoting sustainable
development. Canada welcomes the recent success of
United Nations conferences in some areas of international
resource-management operations, such as the United
Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks. Our goal is concrete, internationally
sanctioned conservation measures. The same objective
applies to our efforts to ensure the sustainable management
of forests and arable land.
The Rio Summit achieved landmark agreements on
climate change and biodiversity. Canada welcomes the
progress made by the Commission on Sustainable
Development and by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), in clarifying their respective roles in
following up these agreements in collaboration with
Member States.
(spoke in English)
In speaking about the three elements — preventive
action, rapid reaction and peacebuilding — I wish to
emphasize the need to see them as mutually reinforcing.
United Nations Member States must be committed to all
three in order for any one to be successful.
To ensure a renewal of the United Nations vision
through these actions, we must also reassert our
commitment to assuring the effectiveness of its key bodies.
Although I could speak of many United Nations agencies
in this regard, because of its critical role in promoting the
vision of the next 50 years, I will limit my remarks to the
Security Council.
The Security Council’s mandate to help prevent
disputes and to resolve conflicts confer on it unique
responsibilities. The binding nature of some decisions
adds further weight to its deliberations.
In recent years the Council has experienced a period
of intensified activity. It has also experienced setbacks
from which we can all learn. One lesson of particular
importance is that members of the Security Council,
especially the permanent five, need to demonstrate a firm
commitment to the implementation of their own decisions.
For Canada, the need for more open, transparent and
collegial decision-making is crucial. There must be closer
consultations with countries contributing personnel and
equipment in order to help implement Council decisions.
Here, real progress has been achieved of late, which
Canada warmly welcomes. This progress needs to be
institutionalized.
The credibility and effectiveness of the Council in
promoting international peace and security is also a key
element. Although we do not regard expansion of its
membership as a panacea, it is clear that composition
plays a role in fostering credibility and effectiveness. The
Council is no longer as representative as it once was. Its
legitimacy,and perhaps also the quality of its decisions,
would be greatly enhanced by more representation from
those countries that contribute the most to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to the
broad purpose of the Organization — that is, the key
criterion for non-permanent membership enshrined in
Article 23 of the Charter.
Perhaps it is time to reflect together on those
purposes to which Article 23 refers. They would surely
include participation in United Nations peace operations,
commitment to arms control and disarmament, support for
good-neighbourly relations, humanitarian assistance,
human rights, development cooperation and the promotion
of civil society. An understanding among Member States
along these lines would help in the selection of
non-permanent Council members, whether on the existing
basis or on a modified basis.
A recurring theme throughout my remarks has been
the need for the United Nations to marshal its scarce
resources more effectively. There is simply no other
option if we are to restore confidence in this Organization
and in the specialized agencies. As the Secretary-General
has stressed, the Organization’s financial crisis is
9


crippling its effectiveness and its credibility. We cannot
allow this to happen.
The answer lies in addressing both expenditure and
revenue. Many Governments, including Canada’s, are
facing difficult budgetary decisions. We have had to live
with expenditure reductions in real terms while maintaining
priority programmes. International organizations must
respect the same pressures as domestic Governments. The
United Nations and its agencies must focus on key
objectives and reduce overhead spending in order to protect
priority programmes. In fact, there are many steps that chief
executive officers can take to increase efficiency and to
reduce costs without impairing programmes, and we should
all insist that they do so. Similarly, many agencies’ budgets
should be held at present levels, wherever possible, if not
reduced. Member States must work collectively to this end.
Canada strongly supports the proposal put forward by the
Secretary-General for an efficiency task force to address
these issues. We are prepared to contribute both expertise
and personnel to get it started soon.
While the United Nations needs to do more to limit
spending and to promote efficiency, its financial crisis
would be significantly alleviated if its Member States were
to meet their financial obligations in full, on time and
without conditions. Canada calls on all Member States to
do so. We cannot accept that Member States, some of
which rank among the richest countries in the world, fail to
meet their financial obligations to this institution. This is
even more difficult to accept when we consider that a
number of the poorest countries in the world meet their
payments in full and on time. Indeed, among the merely 60
Member States that had met their regular budget obligations
to the United Nations fully by 31 July of this year, 32 were
developing countries. Unfortunately, 71 other Member
States had made no payment at all. Almost 100 countries
still owe money from previous years, including, I have to
say, several members of the Security Council. The majority
of Member States appear content to approve programmes,
appropriations and assessments without honouring the
obligations to which they are committed. This is
unacceptable and cannot be allowed to continue.
The General Assembly’s High-level Working Group
considering the United Nations financial plight should begin
looking at the establishment of incentives to pay. It should
also agree on an equitable method of sharing the burden,
free of the distortions that characterize the present scale of
assessments.
In conclusion, let me say that I have sought to pay
tribute to this Organization’s achievements, and to
emphasize that Canada strongly supports the United
Nations. We are prepared to contribute concretely and
actively to its revitalization and renewal. But confidence
will be restored and commitment renewed only through a
partnership in which Member States live up to their
commitment and focus on key priorities that respond to
human-centred goals for sustainable security and
development. If we are successful, and frankly I truly
believe that we will be successful, I have no doubt that 50
years from now our successors will be able to praise,
without hesitation or qualification, the record of our
Organization’s first 100 years.
The 
establishment of the United Nations came about 
through the fundamental recognition of our 
interdependence as peoples and nations. Canada was 
among its founding members, who were inspired at the 
time by the need to create an international consensus 
for the stability and security of a world ravaged by war, 
more than 60 years ago. There is therefore no more 
appropriate forum than this one for me, as Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of Canada, to reaffirm my country’s 
  
 
09-52592 46 
 
commitment to collective action, namely, to work 
together with all countries to pursue shared objectives 
and overcome common challenges. 
 The global economic and financial crisis, as well 
as the global security and environmental threats facing us, 
have underscored the extent of that interdependence. We 
have placed economic recovery and growth at the top of 
our priorities and have taken decisive action in Canada 
to mitigate the impact of the crisis on all Canadians. 
 However, the recovery of Canada’s economy cannot 
happen in isolation from economic recovery across the 
world. Moreover, protectionism is a common threat to all 
of the world’s economies. History has taught us that we 
cannot hope to emerge from the current crisis if we 
impede global trade in an effort to protect our national 
economies. We therefore need vigorous and effective 
consultation at the highest levels so that we can work 
together to resist the protectionist urge. 
 Since the establishment of the United Nations, 
more than 100,000 Canadians have served in United 
Nations missions in Africa, the Americas, the Asia-
Pacific region and the Middle East. Today, thousands 
of others — soldiers, police, diplomats, aid workers 
and others — are working in support of missions led or 
mandated by the United Nations around the world. 
 Eradicating terrorism in all its forms is the 
responsibility both of Canadians and of the United 
Nations. Indeed, Canada is committed to combating 
terrorism and to ensuring that the perpetrators and 
supporters of terrorism are held accountable for their 
actions. The Taliban in particular are a threat to global 
peace and security. Like the United Nations, Canada is 
determined to eradicate that threat. 
 Our mission in Afghanistan is the most vivid 
illustration of Canada’s determination to that end. It also 
constitutes our most significant overseas contribution. 
Canada’s mission is an efficient, integrated, civilian-
military partnership of approximately 2,800 military 
personnel and more than 100 civilians. Those Canadians 
are working tirelessly and making great sacrifices in 
support of the United Nations-mandated Mission to 
reconstitute a stable and secure Afghanistan that is at 
last led by Afghans themselves. 
 In the months ahead, Canada will expect Afghan 
political leaders to make progress on key priorities — 
from good governance to anti-corruption efforts and 
from reconciliation to reconstruction, economic growth 
and regional cooperation, so as to promote stability in 
their country. As they tackle the many challenges 
ahead, they must ensure that their efforts promote, 
protect and improve human rights in a concrete 
manner, in particular the rights and living conditions of 
Afghan women and girls. 
 Canada is also providing significant assistance to 
Haiti, where our contribution will total $555 million 
between 2006 and 2011. We aim to promote democracy, 
security and economic growth and, above all, to secure a 
better future for all of Haiti’s children and young people. 
 Many other challenges remain. Canada regrets 
the deteriorating security situation in southern Sudan, 
and we call for the full implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Along the same 
lines, we encourage all parties to the Darfur conflict to 
end hostilities through the joint mediation of the 
United Nations and the African Union. Canada is 
determined to contribute to resolving the conflict in the 
Sudan. Since 2006, we have disbursed more than 
$640 million in support of international efforts to 
achieve sustainable peace in that country. 
 We are all acutely conscious that nuclear 
proliferation is a global threat we all face. Canada was 
deeply troubled by the recent revelation that Iran has 
been building a covert uranium enrichment facility for 
several years. We condemn Iran’s continued refusal to 
respect Security Council resolutions and International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) obligations. We 
therefore call on Iran to allow the IAEA immediate and 
unfettered access to all sites, including that facility. We 
expect a full investigation. 
 We hope that talks between Iran and the five 
permanent members of the Security Council plus 
Germany that are scheduled for 1 October will address 
the continued duplicity surrounding Iran’s nuclear 
programme. Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada 
has been clear in his discussions with President 
Obama, Prime Minister Brown, President Sarkozy and 
our other allies. Canada will welcome the efforts 
deemed necessary to remove what is clearly a threat to 
international peace and security. 
 In that regard, Canada commended President 
Obama for having taken the initiative to organize a 
summit meeting of the Security Council on the issue of 
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament (see 
S/PV.6191). We commit ourselves to working with other 
countries to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and 
 
 
47 09-52592 
 
new terrorist threats. However, finding a diplomatic 
solution to those problems will require that we mobilize 
political will to ensure that every country adheres to 
the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons. 
(spoke in English) 
 At this time of the year in my country, the leaves 
on the trees are changing colours. That dramatic 
display reminds all Canadians of the need to protect 
our natural heritage, which is one of the most majestic 
in the world. But neither borders nor seasons can stop 
the havoc caused by climate change. Canada therefore 
remains committed to an ambitious post-2012 global 
climate change agreement that is consistent with the 
principles and provisions of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change and 
supports sustainable, low-carbon global growth. 
 We are committed to taking domestic actions to 
reduce our total greenhouse gas emissions by 20 per 
cent from 2006 levels by the year 2020, and by 60 to 
70 per cent by 2050. Canada is a world leader in the 
development of clean technologies to combat climate 
change, including carbon capture and storage. We seek 
to establish a new global partnership that will advance 
the development and deployment of those technologies. 
 Canada joined other countries at the L’Aquila 
meeting of the Group of Eight (G-8) and at the Major 
Economies Forum in affirming the broad scientific 
view that the increase in global average temperature 
above pre-industrial levels ought not to exceed two 
degrees Celsius. 
 This global phenomenon needs a global response. 
That is why Canada wants to see all emitters be part of 
this international effort. We congratulate the Secretary-
General for convening his productive Climate Change 
Summit, as well as for assuming the leadership that 
naturally falls to the United Nations in this area. All 
major economies will be required to meet this global 
challenge. This must be reflected in the context of a 
fair, equitable and effective agreement at Copenhagen 
in December. 
 Adaptation to the impacts of climate change is an 
important issue for all countries. It must be a core 
element of a post-2012 climate change regime if we are 
to build resilience to climate change impacts. Canada 
has contributed significantly to a number of initiatives, 
including the World Bank’s Pilot Program for Climate 
Resilience. We continue to support international action 
that strengthens the capacity of the poorest and most 
vulnerable to adapt to a changing climate. 
 As an Arctic State and Power, Canada is proud of 
its long-standing sovereignty over that increasingly 
promising territory. Canada also recognizes the important 
responsibility that we have to Northerners and to the 
sustainable development and environmental protection of 
the region. Cooperation with our Arctic neighbours and 
the peaceful pursuit of our interests has underpinned 
and will continue to underpin Canada’s arctic foreign 
policy and to guide our actions in the region. Through 
our bilateral and multilateral engagement — whether at 
the United Nations and the Arctic Council or in 
working with our Arctic partners — Canada will continue 
to show leadership on such Arctic issues as shipping, oil 
and gas and contaminants and biodiversity. 
 Since the adoption of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, 61 years ago, Canada has worked 
vigorously to strengthen the United Nations human 
rights machinery to ensure the credibility and integrity 
of fair and balanced mechanisms to promote human 
rights and fundamental freedoms. Human rights are an 
important part of Canadian foreign policy and our 
relations with Member States. During our recently 
completed term on the Human Rights Council, Canada 
worked to make it a forum for constructive international 
dialogue. We will continue to work towards building an 
efficient, responsive and credible Human Rights 
Council that is true to its founding principles. Canada 
will also continue to promote respect for basic human 
rights and the freedom of expression and association. 
And we will continue to advocate for those unjustly 
detained in the world’s most abusive regimes. 
 Finding the political will to translate our values into 
actions and ensuring that we continue to hold to account 
those who would violate basic human rights is in the 
interest of all Member States. Supporting those who 
are making sincere efforts to advance the human rights 
of their populations is also one of our collective 
objectives. 
 Canada is meeting its international commitments. 
We are on track to double our international assistance 
to $5 billion by 2010. We have also already met our 
commitment to double aid to Africa between 2003 and 
2009. Canada will also continue to provide 
humanitarian assistance to those affected by conflict 
and natural disasters. 
  
 
09-52592 48 
 
 Through Canada’s chairmanship of the Sierra 
Leone country-specific configuration of the 
Peacebuilding Commission, we are working to bridge 
the gap between humanitarian assistance and long-term 
development. As Chair of the G-8 in 2010, Canada will 
place emphasis on making the G-8 more accountable 
and effective. Accountability means fulfilling our 
commitments. Effectiveness is about strengthening our 
partnerships, including with the United Nations, to 
tackle challenges such as the fragility of States and 
nuclear non-proliferation. Canada will also co-host the 
summit of the Group of 20 (G-20) in June 2010, along 
with our good friend the Republic of Korea. 
 Our priority will remain economic recovery and 
building the foundation for sustainable growth, 
including for the most vulnerable. Earlier this week, 
Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced a concrete 
and innovative contribution to that effort. Building on 
our previous G-20 commitments, Canada will provide 
the African Development Bank with approximately 
$2.6 billion in additional lending room. That will assist 
the Bank in responding quickly to the demands of its 
borrowing members while it continues its poverty 
reduction efforts. 
 I would urge representatives not to let the 
dizzying succession of major events addressed here 
cause them to lose sight of the importance of reforming 
the Security Council. The Council is our most powerful 
means of collective action. But we can, and indeed we 
must, make it more effective, more accessible and more 
flexible — more adapted, in fact, to the challenges and 
opportunities of the broader international community. 
 Canada has long supported efforts to make the 
Security Council more responsive to today’s security 
challenges and more representative of the world’s 
regions, in particular Africa, which has been 
historically underrepresented. Any real reform must 
lead to increased transparency and accountability. That 
will not be achieved by extending the privileges of a 
few to a few more, but through democratically elected 
access to the Security Council and through more 
consultation with and openness to the wider 
membership of the United Nations. 
 In conclusion, this small reminder of the 
responsibility we all bear for our citizens’ economic, 
environmental and nuclear security can leave us 
perplexed or even worried. But what we must never 
forget is that, in this seemingly uneven battle, we have 
in our arsenal the most effective weapons ever devised 
by humankind, namely, freedom, democracy, human 
rights and the rule of law.It is my honour to address the 
Assembly for the first time as the forty-fourth 
President of the United States. I come before you 
humbled by the responsibility that the American people 
have placed upon me, mindful of the enormous 
challenges of our moment in history and determined to 
act boldly and collectively on behalf of justice and 
prosperity at home and abroad. 
 I have been in office for just nine months, though 
some days it seems a lot longer. I am well aware of the 
expectations that accompany my presidency around the 
world. Those expectations are not about me. Rather 
they are, I believe, rooted in a discontent with the 
status quo that has allowed us to be increasingly 
defined by our differences and outpaced by our 
problems. But they are also rooted in hope — the hope 
that real change is possible and the hope that America 
will be a leader in bringing about such change. 
 I took office at a time when many around the 
world had come to view America with scepticism and 
distrust. A part of that was due to misperceptions and 
misinformation about my country. Part was due to 
opposition to specific policies and a belief that on 
certain critical issues America had acted unilaterally, 
without regard for the interests of others. That has fed 
an almost reflexive anti-Americanism, which too often 
has served as an excuse for collective inaction. 
 Like all of you, my responsibility is to act in the 
interests of my nation and my people, and I will never 
apologize for defending those interests. But it is my 
deeply held belief that in the year 2009, more than at 
any point in human history, the interests of nations and 
peoples are shared. The religious convictions that we 
hold in our hearts can forge new bonds among people, 
or they can tear us apart. The technology we harness 
can light the path to peace, or forever darken it. The 
energy we use can sustain our planet, or destroy it. 
What happens to the hope of a single child, anywhere, 
can enrich our world, or impoverish it. 
 In this Hall, we come from many places, but we 
share a common future. No longer do we have the 
luxury of indulging our differences to the exclusion of 
the work that we must do together. I have carried this 
message from London to Ankara, from Port-of-Spain to 
Moscow, from Accra to Cairo, and it is what I will 
speak about today. 
 Because the time has come for the world to move 
in a new direction, we must embrace a new era of 
engagement based on mutual interests and mutual 
respect, and our work must begin now. We know the 
future will be forged by deeds, and not simply words. 
Speeches alone will not solve our problems. It will take 
persistent action. 
 So for those who question the character and cause 
of my nation, I ask you to look at the concrete actions 
we have taken in just nine months. 
 On my first day in office I prohibited, without 
exception or equivocation, the use of torture by the 
United States of America. I ordered the prison at 
Guantanamo Bay closed, and we are doing the hard 
work of forging a framework to combat extremism 
within the rule of law. 
 Every nation must know that America will live its 
values, and we will lead by example. We have set a 
clear and focused goal to work with all members of 
this body to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and 
its extremist allies — a network that has killed 
thousands of people of many faiths and nations and has 
plotted to blow up this very building. In Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, we and many nations here are helping 
those Governments to develop the capacity to take the 
lead in this effort, while working to advance 
opportunity and security for their people. 
 In Iraq we are responsibly ending a war. We have 
removed American combat brigades from Iraqi cities 
and set a deadline of next August to remove all our 
combat brigades from Iraqi territory. I have made clear 
that we will help Iraqis make the transition to full 
responsibility for their future and keep our 
commitment to remove all American troops by the end 
of 2011. 
 I have outlined a comprehensive agenda to seek 
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. In 
Moscow, the United States and Russia announced that 
we would pursue substantial reductions in our strategic 
warheads and launchers. In the Conference on 
Disarmament we agreed on a workplan to negotiate an 
end to the production of fissile materials for nuclear 
weapons. And this week, my Secretary of State will 
become the first senior American representative to the 
  
 
09-52179 10 
 
annual members’ conference of the Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty. 
 Upon taking office, I appointed a special envoy 
for Middle East peace, and America has worked 
steadily and aggressively to advance the cause of two 
States — Israel and Palestine — in which peace and 
security take root and the rights of both Israelis and 
Palestinians are respected. 
 To confront climate change we have invested 
$80 billion in clean energy. We have substantially 
increased our fuel efficiency standards. We have 
provided new incentives for conservation, launched an 
energy partnership across the Americas and moved 
from being a bystander to being a leader in 
international climate negotiations. 
 To overcome an economic crisis that touches 
every corner of the world, we worked with the Group 
of 20 nations to forge a coordinated international 
response of over $2 trillion in stimulus to bring the 
global economy back from the brink. We mobilized 
resources that help prevent the crisis from spreading 
further to developing countries, and we joined with 
others to launch a $20 billion global food security 
initiative that will lend a hand to those who need it 
most and help them build their own capacity. 
 We have also re-engaged the United Nations. We 
have paid our bills. We have joined the Human Rights 
Council. We have signed the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. We have fully embraced the 
Millennium Development Goals, and we address our 
priorities here in this institution, for instance through the 
Security Council meeting on nuclear non-proliferation 
and disarmament that I will chair tomorrow and 
through the issues that I will discuss today. 
 That is what we have already done, but it is just a 
beginning. Some of our actions have yielded progress; 
some have laid the groundwork for progress in the 
future. But make no mistake: this cannot solely be 
America’s endeavour. Those who used to chastise 
America for acting alone in the world cannot now 
stand by and wait for America to solve the world’s 
problems alone. We have sought, in word and deed, a 
new era of engagement with the world, and now is the 
time for all of us to take our share of responsibility for 
a global response to global challenges. 
 If we are honest with ourselves, we need to admit 
that we are not living up to that responsibility. 
Consider the course that we are on if we fail to 
confront the status quo: extremists sowing terror in 
pockets of the world, protracted conflicts that grind on 
and on, genocide, mass atrocities, more nations with 
nuclear weapons, melting ice caps and ravaged 
populations, persistent poverty and pandemic disease. 
 I say this not to sow fear, but to state a fact. The 
magnitude of our challenges has yet to be met by the 
measure of our actions. This body was founded on the 
belief that the nations of the world could solve their 
problems together. Franklin Roosevelt, who died 
before he could see his vision for this institution 
become a reality, put it this way: 
 “The structure of world peace cannot be the work 
of one man, or one party, or one nation. It cannot 
be a peace of large nations or of small nations. It 
must be a peace which rests on the cooperative 
effort of the whole world.” 
 The cooperative effort of the whole world — 
those words ring even more true today when it is not 
simply peace, but our very health and prosperity that 
we hold in common. Yet, we also know that this body 
is made up of sovereign States and that, sadly but not 
surprisingly, this body has often become a forum for 
sowing discord instead of forging common ground, a 
venue for playing politics and exploiting grievances 
rather than solving problems. After all, it is easy to 
walk up to this podium and point fingers and stoke 
divisions. Nothing is easier than blaming others for our 
troubles and absolving ourselves of responsibility for 
our choices and our actions. Anybody can do that. 
Responsibility and leadership in the twenty-first 
century demand more. 
 In an era when our destiny is shared, power is no 
longer a zero-sum game. No one nation can or should 
try to dominate another nation. No world order that 
elevates one nation or group of people over another 
will succeed. No balance of power among nations will 
hold. The traditional divisions between nations of the 
South and the North make no sense in an 
interconnected world, nor do alignments of nations 
rooted in the cleavages of a long-gone cold war. 
 The time has come to realize that the old habits 
and the old arguments are irrelevant to the challenges 
faced by our peoples. They leave nations to act in 
opposition to the very goals that they claim to pursue 
and to vote, often in this body, against the interests of 
their own people. They build up walls between us and 
 
 
11 09-52179 
 
the future that our peoples seek, and the time has come 
for those walls to come down. Together we must build 
new coalitions that bridge old divides — coalitions of 
different faiths and creeds, of North and South, East, 
West, black, white and brown. 
 The choice is ours. We can be remembered as the 
generation that chose to drag the arguments of the 
twentieth century into the twenty-first, and that put off 
hard choices, refused to look ahead, and failed to keep 
pace because we defined ourselves by what we were 
against instead of what we were for; or we can be a 
generation that chooses to see the shoreline beyond the 
rough waters ahead, that comes together to serve the 
common interests of human beings, and finally gives 
meaning to the promise imbedded in the name given to 
this institution — the United Nations. That is the future 
America wants — a future of peace and prosperity that 
we can reach only if we recognize that all nations have 
rights. But all nations have responsibilities as well. 
That is the bargain that makes this work. That must be 
the guiding principle of international cooperation. 
 Today, let me put forward four pillars that I 
believe are fundamental to the future that we want for 
our children: non-proliferation and disarmament, the 
promotion of peace and security, the preservation of 
our planet, and a global economy that advances 
opportunity for all people. 
 First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons 
and seek the goal of a world without them. This 
institution was founded at the dawn of the atomic age 
in part because man’s capacity to kill had to be 
contained. For decades, we averted disaster, even under 
the shadow of a super-Power stand-off. But today the 
threat of proliferation is growing in scope and 
complexity. If we fail to act, we will invite nuclear 
arms races in every region and the prospect of wars and 
acts of terror on a scale that we can hardly imagine. 
 A fragile consensus stands in the way of this 
frightening outcome, and that is the basic bargain that 
shapes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT). It says that all nations have the right 
to peaceful nuclear energy, and that nations with 
nuclear weapons have a responsibility to move towards 
disarmament and those without them have the 
responsibility to forsake them. The next 12 months 
could be pivotal in determining whether this compact 
will be strengthened or will slowly dissolve. 
 America intends to keep our end of the bargain. 
We will pursue a new agreement with Russia to 
substantially reduce our strategic warheads and 
launches. We will move forward with ratification of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and work 
with others to bring the Treaty into force, so that 
nuclear testing is permanently prohibited. We will 
complete a nuclear posture review that opens the door 
to deeper cuts and reduces the role of nuclear weapons, 
and we will call upon countries to begin negotiations in 
January on a treaty to end the production of fissile 
material for weapons. 
 I will also host a summit next April that reaffirms 
each nation’s responsibility to secure nuclear material 
on its territory and to help those who cannot, because 
we must never allow a single nuclear device to fall into 
the hands of a violent extremist. And we will work to 
strengthen the institutions and initiatives that combat 
nuclear smuggling and theft. 
 All of this must support efforts to strengthen the 
NPT. Those nations that refuse to live up to their 
obligations must face consequences. Let me be clear: 
This is not about singling out individual nations. It is 
about standing up for the rights of all nations that do 
live up to their responsibilities, because a world in 
which International Atomic Energy Agency inspections 
are avoided and the United Nations demands are 
ignored will leave all people less safe and all nations 
less secure. 
 In their actions to date, the Governments of North 
Korea and Iran threaten to take us down this dangerous 
slope. We respect their rights as members of the 
community of nations. I have said before and I will 
repeat: I am committed to diplomacy that opens a path 
to greater prosperity and more secure peace for both 
nations if they live up to their obligations. But if the 
Governments of Iran and North Korea choose to ignore 
international standards; if they put the pursuit of 
nuclear weapons ahead of regional stability and the 
security and opportunity of their own people; if they 
are oblivious to the dangers of escalating nuclear arms 
races in both East Asia and the Middle East, then they 
must be held accountable. The world must stand 
together to demonstrate that international law is not an 
empty promise and that treaties will be enforced. We 
must insist that the future does not belong to fear. 
 That brings me to the second pillar for our future: 
the pursuit of peace. The United Nations was born of 
  
 
09-52179 12 
 
the belief that the people of the world can live their 
lives, raise their families and resolve their differences 
peacefully. Yet we know that in too many parts of the 
world this ideal remains an abstraction — a distant 
dream. We can either accept that outcome as inevitable 
and tolerate constant and crippling conflict, or we can 
recognize that the yearning for peace is universal and 
reassert our resolve to end conflicts around the world. 
That effort must begin with an unshakeable 
determination that the murder of innocent men, women 
and children will never be tolerated. On this, there can 
be no dispute. 
 The violent extremists who promote conflict by 
distorting faith have discredited and isolated 
themselves. They offer nothing but hatred and 
destruction. In confronting them, America will forge 
lasting partnerships to target terrorists, share 
intelligence, coordinate law enforcement and protect 
our people. We will permit no safe haven for Al-Qaida 
to launch attacks from Afghanistan or any other nation. 
We will stand by our friends on the front lines, as we 
and many nations will do in pledging support for the 
Pakistani people tomorrow. And we will pursue 
positive engagement that builds bridges among faiths 
and new partnerships for opportunity. 
 Our efforts to promote peace, however, cannot be 
limited to defeating violent extremists, for the most 
powerful weapon in our arsenal is the hope of human 
beings — the belief that the future belongs to those 
who would build and not destroy; the confidence that 
conflicts can end and a new day can begin. And that is 
why we will strengthen our support for effective 
peacekeeping, while energizing our efforts to prevent 
conflicts before they take hold.  
 We will pursue a lasting peace in Sudan, through 
support for the people of Darfur and the implementation 
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, so that we 
secure the peace that the Sudanese people deserve. 
 And in countries ravaged by violence, from Haiti to 
Congo to East Timor, we will work with the United 
Nations and other partners to support an enduring peace. 
 I will also continue to seek a just and lasting 
peace between Israel, Palestine and the Arab world. We 
will continue to work on that issue. Yesterday I had a 
constructive meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu 
and President Abbas. We have made some progress. 
Palestinians have strengthened their efforts on security. 
Israelis have facilitated greater freedom of movement 
for the Palestinians. As a result of these efforts on both 
sides, the economy in the West Bank has begun to 
grow. 
 But more progress is needed. We continue to call 
on Palestinians to end incitement against Israel. And 
we continue to emphasize that America does not accept 
the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements. 
 The time has come to re-launch negotiations — 
without preconditions — that address the permanent-
status issues: security for Israelis and Palestinians, 
borders, refugees and Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two 
States living side by side in peace and security: a 
Jewish State of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, 
and a viable, independent Palestinian State with 
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that began 
in 1967 and realizes the potential of the Palestinian 
people. As we pursue this goal, we will also pursue 
peace between Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Syria, 
and a broader peace between Israel and its many 
neighbours. In pursuit of that goal, we will develop 
regional initiatives with multilateral participation, 
alongside bilateral negotiations. 
 Now, I am not naive. I know this will be difficult. 
But all of us — not just the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, but all of us — must decide whether we 
are serious about peace, or whether we will only lend it 
lip-service. To break the old patterns — to break the 
cycle of insecurity and despair — all of us must say 
publicly what we would acknowledge in private. The 
United States does Israel no favours when we fail to 
couple an unwavering commitment to its security with 
an insistence that Israel respect the legitimate claims 
and rights of the Palestinians. And nations within this 
body do the Palestinians no favours when they choose 
vitriolic attacks against Israel over a constructive 
willingness to recognize Israel’s legitimacy and its 
right to exist in peace and security. 
 We must remember that the greatest price of this 
conflict is not paid by us. It is not paid by politicians. 
It is paid by the Israeli girl in Sderot who closes her 
eyes in fear that a rocket will take her life in the middle 
of the night. It is paid by the Palestinian boy in Gaza 
who has no clean water and no country to call his own. 
These are all God’s children. And after all the politics 
and all the posturing, this is about the right of every 
human being to live with dignity and security. That is a 
lesson embedded in the three great faiths that call one 
small slice of Earth the Holy Land. And that is why — 
 
 
13 09-52179 
 
even though there will be setbacks, and false starts, and 
tough days — I will not waiver in my pursuit of peace. 
 Thirdly, we must recognize that in the twenty-
first century there will be no peace unless we take 
responsibility for the preservation of our planet. And I 
thank the Secretary-General for hosting the summit on 
climate change yesterday. 
 The danger posed by climate change cannot be 
denied. Our responsibility to meet it must not be 
deferred. If we continue down our current course, 
every member of this Assembly will see irreversible 
changes within its borders. Our efforts to end conflicts 
will be eclipsed by wars over refugees and resources. 
Development will be devastated by drought and 
famine. Land that human beings have lived on for 
millennia will disappear. Future generations will look 
back and wonder why we refused to act — why we 
failed to pass on an environment that was worthy of 
our inheritance. 
 And that is why the days when America dragged 
its feet on this issue are over. We will move forward 
with investments to transform our energy economy, 
while providing incentives to make clean energy the 
profitable kind of energy. We will press ahead with 
deep cuts in emissions to reach the goals that we set for 
2020, and eventually 2050. We will continue to 
promote renewable energy and efficiency — and share 
new technologies — with countries around the world. 
And we will seize every opportunity for progress to 
address this threat in a cooperative effort with the 
entire world. 
 Those wealthy nations that did so much damage 
to the environment in the twentieth century must 
accept our obligation to lead. But responsibility does 
not end there. While we must acknowledge the need for 
differentiated responses, any effort to curb carbon 
emissions must include the fast-growing carbon 
emitters who can do more to reduce their air pollution 
without inhibiting growth. And any effort that fails 
both to help the poorest nations to adapt to the 
problems that climate change has already wrought and 
to help them travel a path of clean development simply 
will not work. 
 It is hard to change something as fundamental as 
how we use energy. I know that. It is even harder to do 
so in the midst of a global recession. Certainly, it will 
be tempting to sit back and wait for others to move 
first. But we cannot make this journey unless we all 
move forward together. As we head into Copenhagen, 
let us resolve to focus on what each of us can do for 
the sake of our common future. 
 This leads me to the final pillar that must fortify 
our future: a global economy that advances opportunity 
for all people. 
 The world is still recovering from the worst 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. In 
America, we see the engine of growth beginning to 
churn, and yet many still struggle to find a job or pay 
their bills. Across the globe, we find promising signs, 
but little certainty about what lies ahead. And far too 
many people in far too many places live through the 
daily crises that challenge our humanity: the despair of 
an empty stomach; the thirst brought on by dwindling 
water supplies; the injustice of a child dying from a 
treatable disease or a mother losing her life as she 
gives birth. 
 In Pittsburgh, we will work with the world’s 
largest economies to chart a course for growth that is 
balanced and sustained. That means vigilance to ensure 
that we do not let up until our people are back to work. 
That means taking steps to rekindle demand, so that 
global recovery can be sustained. And that means 
setting new rules of the road and strengthening 
regulation for all financial centres, so that we put an 
end to the greed and the excess and the abuse that led 
us into this disaster, and prevent a crisis like this from 
ever happening again. 
 At a time of such interdependence, we have a 
moral and pragmatic interest, however, in broader 
questions of development: the questions of development 
that existed even before this crisis happened. And so 
America will continue our historic effort to help people 
feed themselves. We have set aside $63 billion to carry 
forward the fight against HIV/AIDS, to end deaths 
from tuberculosis and malaria, to eradicate polio and to 
strengthen public health systems. We are joining with 
other countries to contribute H1N1 vaccines to the 
World Health Organization. We will integrate more 
economies into a system of global trade. We will 
support the Millennium Development Goals and 
approach next year’s summit with a global plan to 
make them a reality. And we will set our sights on the 
eradication of extreme poverty in our time. 
 Now is the time for all of us to do our part. 
Growth will not be sustained or shared unless all 
nations embrace their responsibilities. That means that 
  
 
09-52179 14 
 
wealthy nations must open their markets to more goods 
and extend a hand to those with less, while reforming 
international institutions to give more nations a greater 
voice. And developing nations must root out the 
corruption that is an obstacle to progress, for 
opportunity cannot thrive where individuals are 
oppressed and businesses have to pay bribes. That is 
why we will support honest police and independent 
judges, civil society and a vibrant private sector. Our 
goal is simple: a global economy in which growth is 
sustained and opportunity is available to all. 
 Now, the changes that I have spoken about today 
will not be easy to make, and they will not be realized 
simply by leaders like us coming together in forums 
like this, as useful as that may be. For, as in any 
assembly of members, real change can only come 
through the people we represent. That is why we must 
do the hard work to lay the groundwork for progress in 
our own capitals. That is where we will build the 
consensus to end conflicts and to harness technology 
for peaceful purposes, to change the way we use 
energy and to promote growth that can be sustained 
and shared. 
 I believe that the people of the world want this 
future for their children. And that is why we must 
champion those principles that ensure that 
Governments reflect the will of the people. These 
principles cannot be afterthoughts. Democracy and 
human rights are essential to achieving each of the 
goals that I have discussed today, because 
Governments of the people and by the people are more 
likely to act in the broader interests of their own 
people, rather than the narrow interest of those in 
power. 
 The test of our leadership will not be the degree 
to which we feed the fears and old hatreds of our 
people. True leadership will not be measured by the 
ability to muzzle dissent or to intimidate and harass 
political opponents at home. The people of the world 
want change. They will not long tolerate those who are 
on the wrong side of history. 
 This Organization’s Charter commits each of us 
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the 
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal 
rights of men and women”. 
 Among those rights is the freedom to speak your 
mind and worship as you please, the promise of 
equality of the races and the opportunity for women 
and girls to pursue their own potential, and the ability 
of citizens to have a say in how you are governed and 
to have confidence in the administration of justice. For, 
just as no nation should be forced to accept the tyranny 
of another nation, no individual should be forced to 
accept the tyranny of their own people. 
 As an African-American, I will never forget that I 
would not be here today without the steady pursuit of a 
more perfect union in my country. That guides my 
belief that no matter how dark the day may seem, 
transformative change can be forged by those who 
choose to side with justice. And I pledge that America 
will always stand with those who stand up for their 
dignity and their rights — for the student who seeks to 
learn, the voter who demands to be heard, the innocent 
who longs to be free and the oppressed who yearns to 
be equal. 
 Democracy cannot be imposed on any nation 
from the outside. Each society must search for its own 
path, and no path is perfect. Each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its people and in its past 
traditions. And I admit that America has too often been 
selective in its promotion of democracy. But that does 
not weaken our commitment; it only reinforces it. 
There are basic principles that are universal. There are 
certain truths that are self-evident, and the United 
States of America will never waiver in our efforts to 
stand up for the right of people everywhere to 
determine their own destiny. 
 Sixty-five years ago, a weary Franklin Roosevelt 
spoke to the American people in his fourth, and final, 
inaugural address. After years of war, he sought to sum 
up the lessons that could be drawn from the terrible 
suffering and enormous sacrifice that had taken place. 
We have learned, he said, to be citizens of the world, 
members of the human community. The United Nations 
was built by men and women like Roosevelt from 
every corner of the world — from Africa and Asia, 
from Europe to the Americas. These architects of 
international cooperation had an idealism that was 
anything but naive. It was rooted in the hard-earned 
lessons of war, rooted in the wisdom that nations could 
advance their interests by acting together instead of 
splitting apart. 
 Now it falls to us, for this institution will be what 
we make of it. The United Nations does extraordinary 
good around the world, in feeding the hungry, caring 
for the sick and mending places that have been broken. 
 
 
15 09-52179 
 
But it also struggles to enforce its will and to live up to 
the ideals of its founding. I believe that those 
imperfections are not a reason to walk away from this 
institution; they are a calling to redouble our efforts. 
The United Nations can be a place where we either 
bicker about outdated grievances or forge common 
ground; a place where we focus on what drives us apart 
or what brings us together; a place where we indulge 
tyranny or a source of moral authority. In short, the 
United Nations can be an institution that is 
disconnected from what matters in the lives of our 
citizens or it can be an indispensable factor in 
advancing the interests of the people we serve. 
 We have reached a pivotal moment. The United 
States stands ready to begin a new chapter of 
international cooperation, one that recognizes the 
rights and responsibilities of all nations. And so, with 
confidence in our cause and with a commitment to our 
values, we call on all nations to join us in building the 
future that our people so richly deserve. Mr. President, I should like first of all to associate myself with the previous speakers who have congratulated you on your election to the high office of President of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The United States is confident that you will pursue the ideals of the Charter with the same dedication as your distinguished predecessors.

2.	The United Nations is an important instrument of peace. It is also the repository of many of the world's hopes. We must ensure that it is true to those hopes; that we here assembled-the representatives of 130 nations- meet our high responsibilities not only to our own world but to the world of the future.
3.	Building a structure of peace-a structure that will stand-requires patience, dedication and realism. Working at peace working at it seriously means more than long hours of careful deliberation. It means putting aside preconceptions; it means weighing carefully what our real interests are, not only as citizens of our own countries, but also as citizens of the world. It means proceeding with urgency, but without impatience; steadfastly, but not stubbornly. And it means recognizing that differences exist, and will continue to exist-differences of view, differences of interests, different systems and different values-and that one of the functions of a structure of peace is to protect and accommodate those differences, not to destroy them.
4.	It is appropriate, I think, to take note of the fact that, by any objective standard, the world is a more peaceful place than it was just a few years ago.
5.	In Africa;, the conflict in Nigeria is now long over. Because of recent developments, prospects in the Far East seem more hopeful. Fighting in Indo-China, though it continues, has been substantially reduced. The cease-fire still holds in the Middle East. The division of Europe is less


threatening because the first stage of agreement has been reached on Berlin. Concrete agreements have been achieved on the periphery of the arms race, and encouraging progress is being made at its center.
6.	Yet there are areas-above all, in South Asia where political instability has tipped the balance toward greater tension. There, man's ancient, enemies-poverty, hunger and disease-gain headway, nurturing within themselves seeds of further unrest. And even in areas where recent progress has been made, tensions remain, and the threat of renewed or increased hostilities continues.
7.	That is why we must accelerate our efforts for peace. The achievement of a peaceful world will depend, not just, on the efforts of a handful of powers, but on the efforts of all Governments.
8.	In recent years we have seen a new diversification of power and influence among the nations of the world. Most colonial States have won their independence and now exert a marked impact on world affairs. Japan has found remarkable new strength. The movement towards cohesion in Western Europe has quickened. This diversified and interdependent world is clearly preferable to the bipolar world which emerged from the Second World War. Nevertheless, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States-both large, continental States, both nuclear States and both dynamic States-are of fundamental importance.
9.	Nothing could better serve the cause of peace than a further relaxation of tension between our two countries and the elimination of its by-product-the arms race.
10.	The foreseeable future cannot, of course, be expected to bring an end to the differences between the Soviet and United States political systems or to the competition between us. But it can bring important and beneficial changes in our relations. Many agreements have been achieved in recent years between us. The success of those agreements has stimulated the effort to negotiate still others. Collectively they could promote not just 'coexistence' but-if we proceed to build on durable foundations 'co-operation' as well.
11.	Our desire to lay the foundations for such cooperation is in no way lessened by our policy of seeking to improve relations with the People's Republic of China. And we have taken due note of the Soviet Foreign Minister's statement that the Soviet Union regards the normalization or our relations with the People's Republic of China as a 'natural development'.
12.	Though efforts at improvement in Soviet-United States and in Soviet-European relations have assumed many 
forms, the two most important have been the negotiations on strategic arms and on Berlin.
13.	A Berlin agreement will be a milestone along the road to a more peaceful and co-operative Europe. Pivotal in the portion already agreed to is the firm commitment to unrestricted transit traffic of civilian persons and goods between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin. Particularly significant is the obligation the Soviet Union has undertaken to ensure that this traffic will be unimpeded, that it will be facilitated and that it will receive preferential treatment.
14.	The value of this agreement will depend, not on how the obligations have been formulated on paper, but on how they will be carried out on the ground. Truly unhindered movement to and from Berlin would greatly reduce tensions and remove one of Europe's most dangerous flash-points. Half-hearted or grudging implementation of the agreement would only perpetuate fears and suspicions, The willingness of the German Democratic Republic, in its discussions with the Federal Republic of Germany, to translate general obligations into specific commitments and subsequently to put those commitments into actual practice will be the crucial test.
15.	The achievement of a final Berlin agreement and its effective implementation could lead to broader progress. It would, for example, make more realistic the prospects of a European conference with United States and Canadian participation. It would accelerate the movement desired by the people of Eastern as well as of Western Europe-- towards the reduction of tensions on the continent.
16.	It is to this end that the United States is pursuing the possibilities of negotiation on a mutual and balanced reduction of military forces in Europe.
17.	Two years ago President Nixon pledged to the General Assembly that the United States was determined to limit, and then reverse, the build-up of strategic arms. He said we intended to conduct our negotiations with the Soviet Union 'soberly and seriously... seeking to reach agreements rather than to make propaganda' [1755th meeting, para. 69J.
18.	In May of this year the United States and the Soviet Union announced their intention to achieve agreement on both defensive and offensive strategic arms, initiating a new stage of intensive work. As a result, although no agreement has yet been reached, we have come closer together on the concepts and details of an agreement to limit anti-ballistic missile systems. On 20 May we made an announcement that contemplates that agreements to limit defensive and offensive weapons will be reached 'together'. When talks resume in Vienna next month it is therefore agreed that discussions in greater detail will be undertaken on the limitation of offensive weapons.
19.	Meanwhile, these negotiations have already produced two valuable agreements, one on preventing nuclear accidents from leading to war and the other on improving 'hot line' communications between Washington and Moscow by use of satellites,
20.	There has also been encouraging movement in multi-lateral negotiations. Here, too, the United States intends to work constructively for further concrete results. In particular, we urge this session of the General Assembly to seek broad ratification of the draft convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their destruction [A/8457-DC/234, annex A],
21.	The Soviet Union has suggested the creation of a periodic world disarmament conference to be established outside the United Nations [1942nd meeting, paras. 158' 159J. Frankly, we are skeptical that such a generalized approach would produce specific accomplishments. All post-war experience indicates that a concrete, step-by-step approach offers better prospects for success than more grandiose schemes, which tend to generate many words but few results.
22.	At a time when the prospects are promising for participation in the United Nations by the People's Republic of China, and perhaps others as well, there would seem to be no reason for establishing still more world disarmament machinery outside the United Nations framework.
23.	Accommodations among the stronger nations of the World are vital elements of a lasting peace. But the road to enduring peace is no short cut, passing only through the capitals of the strong. The road to peace must traverse every region where there are human beings who aspire to a better condition of life.
24.	In Africa, where the right to a freer existence is still denied to many, we are constant in our support of practical and peaceful means to achieve self-determination and end racial discrimination. That is the policy which President Nixon and I were pleased to confirm to the President of Mauritania and the distinguished delegation from the Organization of African Unity in Washington last week. Consistent with that objective ve have decided to accept the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences for States of South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia. .
25.	In South-East Asia, as we proceed with an orderly military withdrawal from Viet-Nam, we will continue to make substantial efforts to aid the region's economic progress.
26.	In this hemisphere, we are moving towards a relation-ship of equal partnership in which rights and responsibilities are shared. We are conscious that such a relationship requires economic growth, greater opportunities for trade, and closer economic co-operation among us.
27.	I especially wish to emphasize our undiminished concern for the economic health of the nations of Latin America and other nations of the developing world at a time when the new economic policy of the United States may have raised certain questions,
28.	Our objectives have not changed. We are not adopting a policy of economic nationalism. We have not abandoned our efforts to assist developing countries-through trade, through aid and through investment. Our faith in a free and open system of economic relations among States has not diminished.
29.	We seek a stronger economy at home. We seek also a more equitable international economic system which meets present-day conditions and thus gives even greater encouragement to the flow of goods and capital across borders. Such a system would contribute to the prosperity of all the world's people, in developing and developed countries alike.
30.	This Organization, during this session, faces a decision on the China question-a decision with major consequences for the United Nations.
31.	In our interdependent world, no significant segment of the world's population and of the world's power should be isolated. It was this consideration which led President Nixon to alter the China policy of the United States. To pursue a policy which did not respond to present realities would risk the future for the sake of the past . On the other hand, to seek to improve relations with the People's Republic of China, and to contribute to its greater contact with the international community, could foster prospects for a stable peace in years to come.
32.	Thus, President Nixon began over two years ago, unilaterally and at first without response, to improve bilateral relations. Recently, he resolved to move decisively into a new era of relations by accepting an invitation to visit Peking before 1 May 1972. And he decided to support the seating of the People's Republic of China in the General Assembly and as a permanent member of the Security Council.
33.	The United States wants to see the People's Republic of China come to the Assembly, take its seat, and participate. We want to see it assume, as a permanent member of the Security Council, the rights and responsibilities which go with that status. On the seating of the People's Republic of China there is widespread agreement in this body.
34.	This Assembly does, however, face a related and momentous issue. It could become the first Assembly in United Nations history to take action to expel a Member -an action which would have the effect of expelling 14 million people from its councils. The path of expulsion is perilous. To open it for one would be to open it for many.
35.	So the United States and 16 other countries have introduced a draft resolution [A/L.633] which would seat the People's Republic of China as a permanent member of the Security Council, while providing representation both for it and for the Republic of China in the General Assembly. That resolution is based on political reality and on basic equity.
36.	It is only realistic to recognize a factual situation which has persisted for more than 20 years: that two Governments now exercise authority over territory and over people who were given representation in the United Nations when China ratified the Charter in 1945 as an original Member.
37.	It is only realistic that all the Chinese people who were once represented there should again be represented and represented by those who actually govern them.
38.	It is only realistic that the Security Council seat should be filled by the People's Republic of China, which exercises control over the largest number of people of all the world's Governments.
39.	It would be unrealistic to expel from this body the Republic of China, which governs a population of Taiwan larger than the populations of two 'thirds of the 130 United Nations Members.
40.	Further, it would be unjust to expel a Member which has participated for over 25 years in the world of this Organization with unfailing devotion to the principles set forth in the Charter.
41.	The proposal that both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China should be represented in the United Nations should commend itself to Member States of varying national policies.
42.	It would assure that the long-prevailing de facto situation in China is reflected in United Nations representation; but it does not ask Member States to alter their recognition policies or their bilateral relations.
43.	It would provide representation for the people concerned by those who actually govern them; but it does not divide China into two separate States; after all, we all know that Byelorussia and the Ukraine are not separate States.
44.	The dual representation draft resolution is founded on the reality of the current situation; but it does not seek to freeze that situation for the future, as it expressly provides that the present decision is without prejudice to a future settlement.
45.	In short, the dual representation draft resolution asks simply, and only, that the United Nations take account of the situation as it exists today, and give all the people of China representation in this Organization. As the Charter has accommodated practical solutions of other unusual situations in the past,, so it is flexible enough to accommodate the realities of this one.
46.	The other proposal before this Assembly the draft resolution advanced by A'bania and others [AjL.630 and Add. 1 ] -is punitive in substance and in intent. It does not seek to deal with facts, but to excoriate and condemn. Its essence is not to admit the People's Republic of China, but to expel the Republic of China and to expel it 'forthwith'. That draft resolution would exacerbate, not harmonize, relations in Asia. And it would weaken, not strengthen, the moral and political fiber of this Organization.
47.	The issue, then, before this body is the issue of expulsion. That is why we have proposed a draft resolution, which we refer to as the 'important question draft resolution' but which more properly should be referred to as the 'non-expulsion draft resolution' [AjL.632]. This draft resolution requires a two-thirds vote to expel a present Member of the United Nations. It is consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Charter,
48.	Some Members have argued that, whatever the equities and realism of our proposal to maintain the representation of the Republic of China, it should not be supported because they feel that the People's Republic of China would refuse to take its seat. Such predictions are hazardous. Certainly the People's Republic of China may be expected to oppose the proposal so long as there is any possibility for a draft resolution that meets its maximum demands. But just as certainly, after a General Assembly decision providing the People's Republic of China with the status of a permanent member of, and with a seat on, the Security Council but not expelling the Republic of China, a new situation would exist. In any event, I submit, in deciding how to vote we should look more to what the United Nations should do.
49.	It is ironic that, just as the sentiment for universality in the Assembly is growing, many of those who have long extolled it now seek to violate it. If the United Nations is to. embrace universality-as some have suggested then surely the admission of one Member should not be accompanied by the expulsion of another.
50.	Our task here, it seems to me, must be to make a decision that is reasonable, that accepts the realities of the existing situation, that does not prejudice the ultimate outcome and that provides for representation of all the people concerned. Thereafter, our efforts should be to convince those directly involved to take advantage of the decision we have made. The cause of peace has been greatly benefited in recent years by greater pragmatism in many capitals. It would be served by the same pragmatism on this issue.
51.	As the United Nations becomes a more universal body it will be better able to deal with the lengthening list of global issues confronting it: in conciliating political differences, in reducing the world's armaments, in curbing the epidemic spread of narcotics addiction, in protecting the environment, in assuring the exploitation of the oceans for the benefit of mankind.
52.	In meeting those responsibilities the United Nations must during this session deal with two important matters.
53.	It must choose an outstanding successor to our most able and distinguished Secretary-General, UThant, to whose dedication and idealism we all pay a tribute. And, as I pay respects to the Secretary-General, I am sure my colleagues will understand if I also single out for special attention two United States citizens who are now retiring -Paul Hoffman, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program, who has devoted himself so effectively to the economic welfare of the developing countries, and Ralph Bunche, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, and a Nobel Prize winner, who has contributed so markedly to the cause of peace.
54.	The Assembly must also arrest the continuing deterioration of the United Nations financial position, which, as the Secretary-General has pointed out [A/8401/Add.lJ, has eroded its fiscal credit and undermined confidence in its potential. Responsibility for halting that decline rests primarily on those who fail to pay their share. Given assurances of adequate contributions by others, the United States will be prepared to assist towards an over-all solution. Meanwhile we find it hard to understand why the membership should continue to recommend and approve budget increases beyond those necessary to meet inescapable cost increases.
55.	In two parts of the world in which the United Nations has been particularly active-South Asia and the Middle East urgent progress is needed.
56.	In South Asia, renewed and more widespread violence is an ever-present possibility. The events in East Pakistan are internal events with which the Government and people of Pakistan must deal. But their consequences the flight of refugees into India, the danger of famine, the threat to peace in South Asia-are of grave concern to all nations.
57.	To restore peaceful conditions and to save human lives it is clear that restraint must be exercised in the subcontinent; that the international assistance Program must be expanded to avert famine and to create conditions to encourage the return of refugees; and that efforts towards an effective political settlement in East Pakistan must be actively pursued. We are working to those ends.
58.	The United States strongly supports the efforts of the United Nations to organize an effective international relief Program. We have made available over $200 million for relief in bast Pakistan and for emergency assistance for the refugees in India-well over 50 per cent of the total contributions from all foreign contributors, public and private. Last week, President Nixon asked Congress to appropriate an additional $250 million to sustain a high level of relief assistance. A much wider response from other countries is clearly required. We urge the major powers and others with substantial financial resources to contribute generously.
59.	The other place where progress is urgently required is the Middle East. Over several years the United Nations has made determined and persistent efforts to achieve a lasting peace in that critical area. None the less the opportunities for success and the risks of failure remain in precarious balance.
60.	Security Council resolution 242 (1967), establishing the principles for a durable peace, was the first major step towards reason after 18 years of belligerency and a fragile, often violated, armistice.
61.	The cease-fire along the Suez Canal, now nearing its fifteenth month, was the second major step away from war.
62.	It is time for a third major step towards peace.
63.	For four years Ambassador Jarring has worked diligently to secure the agreement called for in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). We support his efforts. We believe his mission remains the best path to an over-all settlement and to lasting peace. Our views on such a final peace settlement remain those expressed in President Nixon's foreign policy report earlier this year and in my statement of 9 December 1969,
64.	Both sides to the conflict are committed to the fundamental and reciprocal principles to which the Jarring mission is dedicated: living in peace with each other and withdrawal from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict as set forth in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Despite those commitments a deep gulf ot suspicion and distrust remains.
65.	Each side is convinced of the justice of its cause. Each is concerned about its future security. A political settlement based on mutual accommodation could assure both. An attempt to achieve these ends by force will destroy all possibilities for either.
66.	That is why we believe a third major step towards peace is essential -a step that can be taken now; a step that is practical; a step that could help create the confidence and trust which are now lacking; a step towards full and complete implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
67.	That step is an interim Suez Canal agreement. That is why the United States has welcomed the interest of both Egypt and Israel in such an agreement. That is why, at the request of the parties, the United States has undertaken to play a constructive role in the process of arriving at an agreement.
68.	In order to explore the positions of each side, we have discussed concrete and specific ideas designed to meet the legitimate needs and concerns of both sides. Those ideas, given willingness and good intentions on both sides, could become the basis for a breakthrough. They require further quiet discussions with the parties, an undertaking we now hope can be expedited along the following lines.
69.	A first point is the relationship between an interim agreement and an over-all settlement. A fair approach should be founded on two basic principles:
-That a Suez Canal agreement is merely a step towards complete and full implementation of resolution 242 (1967) within a reasonable period of time, and not an end in itself-that has to be clearly established in any agreement; also
-That neither side can realistically expect \to achieve, as part of an interim agreement, complete agreement on the terms and conditions of an over-all settlement -if it could, there would be no necessity for an interim agreement.
Those final terms and conditions will have to be worked out through negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices. And we would hope that if an interim agreement was reached, active negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices could be renewed.
70.	A second point is the matter of the cease-fire. Its maintenance is in the interest of all of us, of everyone concerned, of everyone in this room, in fact in the interest of the whole world. The ultimate objective, of course, is a permanent end to belligerency, as part of a final, binding peace agreement. But such a commitment is not realizable in the context of an interim agreement. Neither would a cease-fire of short duration be realistic. With goodwill on both sides, it should be possible to find common under-standing between the parties on this issue.
71.	Third is the zone of withdrawal. There are, of course, very important strategic considerations involved in this key point. However, based on our discussions, we believe it should be possible to meet the principal concerns of both sides. Without going into the details, I would merely say that I believe that in the long run the most significant aspect of an interim agreement might prove to be that it established the principle of withdrawal looking to an over-all settlement as a fact rather than as a theory.
72.	Fourth is the nature of the supervisory arrangements. Both sides must have confidence that the agreement will not be violated and that adequate machinery will be provided for prompt detection of any infractions. We are confident that ways reassuring to both Israel and Egypt can be found for altering and strengthening the supervisory mechanisms that have existed in the area for the past two decades.
73.	Fifth is the question of an Egyptian presence east of the Suez Canal. The reopening and operation of the Suez Canal would require Egyptian personnel east of the Canal. It is understandable, too, that normal activities should be pursued in as much of the zone evacuated as possible. The question of an Egyptian military presence east of the Canal is one on which the parties hold opposite views. But here too, based on our discussion, we believe that there are possibilities for compromise on this issue.
74.	Sixth is the use of the Suez Canal. The United States has long held that the Canal should be open to passage for all nations, without discrimination. This principle is clear in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). What is at present at issue in considering an interim agreement is principally the timing at which this right could be exercised. We believe an accommodation on this point is quite possible.
75.	With those six points in mind, let me say this: because the parties have asked us, we intend to continue our determined effort to assist them in arriving at an interim agreement. This effort, we believe, is imperative because  and I think it is important to keep this in mind there is no more realistic and hopeful alternative to pursue.
76.	There are risks to peace: but the greater risk is inaction, unwillingness to face up to the hard decisions. A practical step now-an interim agreement-would make the next step toward peace less difficult for all the parties to take. It would restore the use of the Suez Canal as a waterway for international shipping. It would re-establish Egypt's authority over a major national asset. It would separate the combatants. It would produce the first Israeli withdrawal. It would extend the cease-fire. It would diminish the risk of major-power involvement. It would be an important step toward the complete implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
77.	I submit that the logic for such an agreement is overwhelming. If the leaders of the area would grasp this opportunity, they would give new hope to their peoples for tranquility, for progress and for peace.
78.	In all of our efforts, both in the United Nations and elsewhere, we should recall that nothing we do matters so much as the legacy we leave to those who follow, the bridge that we build between the past and the future. There is a tendency, especially when tensions are high and tempers short, to regard the present as the focal point of all of man's history. But ours is only the latest generation, not the last generation; and nothing we leave to future generations will matter so much as a structure of enduring peace.
79.	Peace must be achieved and maintained, not by the decree of a few, but by accommodation among many. Each Government, in upholding its people's particular interests, must also advance the world interest in a peace which will endure.
80.	To that interest the United Nations, from its creation, has been dedicated.
81.	To that interest the United States pledges anew its best efforts.



48.	  May I first offer you, Sir, the fiM support and cooperation of the Canadian delegation in the performance of the great responsibility you have accepted as President of the General Assembly. Canada welcomes your presence In the Chair and offers Its good wishes to the people of Indonesia, whom you have served with such distinction In this Organization, It Is Indicative of the scope and variety of our Organization that the presidency should move from the representative of one of the northernmost countries of Europe to one of the southernmost countries of Asia without any disruption In our continuing work,
49.	I should like at this time to thank the previous President, Mr. Bdvard Hambro, for the skill and judgment he showed as our presiding officer at the last session,
50.	It is a matter of deep regret in Canada that this should be the last session at which UThant will occupy the Seeret«fy*GeneraPs chair, U Thant has carried out his heavy responsibilities and fulfilled  his arduous obligations with a serenity and steadfastness that have been an example to us all and have won the respect and admiration of all everywhere, 1 am sure his quiet and authoritative voice will continue to be heard In the councils of the nations, and on behalf of the people of Canada I wish him well In his future endeavors.
51.	This twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly opens a new quarter-century In the life of our Organization, and I suggest that It may mark a turning-point In our history, and the opportunity for a new beginning, if this Assembly moves promptly and effectively to seat the People's Republic of China In the seat of China, China Is a charter Member of this Organization and a permanent member of the Security Council, The only question before us, 1 suggest, is who should occupy to existing seat of China, The Canadian position is clear: the Government that has responsibility for the overwhelming majority of the Chinese people must now take its proper place here-the Government of the People's Republic of China. The searing of the Peking Government in this Assembly and in the Security Council will bring the effective Government of a quarter of mankind into our councils.
52.	Canada endorses the principle of universality of membership and looks forward to a time when the divided States, too, can be properly represented here. But principles must always be conditioned by facts, and before this ideal can be reached there are serious practical problems to be solved. There would be no particular advantage for the United Nations or for the divided States themselves were they to do no more than import their special problems and conflicts into the wider forum of this Organization.
53.	I have said that Canada endorses the principle of universality, and in the Canadian view there is an important principle involved. The communications explosion has annihilated time and distance, two factors that used to isolate problems in one part of the world from those in another and frequently contributed to the solution of such problems by allowing a breathing-space in which good judgment and common sense could be brought to bear. International problems can no longer be localized easily; every such problem is a world problem and involves the world community, which is, in effect, the United Nations. The simple theorem that universal problems call for universal solutions is almost a tautology. And universal solutions are likelier to be found by a body that is universally representative. 
54.	1 should like to illustrate what I mean by touching briefly on four problem areas: armed conflicts, the physical environment, arms control and disarmament, and world trade;
55.	As we look around the world today we see armed conflict or the seeds of aimed conflict in many parts of the world, Those cases where international disputes involve Member nations, as for example the Middle East, fall clearly within the responsibility of the United Nations. Where conflicts are contained within a single State, established practice at least suggests that they do not so fall. This leaves with us a question which I will pose and discuss but to which Canada has no definitive answer to offer: at what point does an internal conflict affect so many nations to such an extent that it can no longer properly be accepted as a domestic matter?
56.	I sense a growing world concern that tragedies are unfolding and that nothing is being done about them by the world community as represented by the United Nations. The capacity of this Organization to resolve conflicts, whether domestic or international, is limited by two realities: the terms of the Charter and the will of the Member nations.
57.	I need hardly say that we do not here constitute a supranational authority. I do not believe that the world is ready for such an authority, for any kind of world government. Today, most of the nations of the world, older and newer equally, are preoccupied with internal problems. Certainly Canada is no exception. Canada is facing internal problems of both an economic and a political nature. Canada believes that domestic problems are best dealt with by domestic solutions, and others feel the same way. The question is: how can the international community best assist in a situation where an internal problem has got beyond the capacity of the Government concerned? The mere fact that the nations are preoccupied with internal problems and questions of sovereignty in the foreseeable future does not excuse us from making the best possible use of the instrument we have, the United Nations. The United Nations can and should move promptly and effectively, as it often has done, to ameliorate human suffering and protect, to the extent possible, the innocent non- combatants that often bear most of the suffering. This is a noble end in itself and can be a means toward the settlement of a conflict by creating a better and saner atmosphere.
58.	No move in the direction of universality can in itself offer any great hope for easier solutions to the problems that are troubling our world, but it could offer a strengthening of our Organization that should help us to come to grips with them.
59.	Turning to the second great universal problem* how to preserve a natural environment that will continue to support life on earth, the United Nations has recognized its global nature by setting up the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, to be held in Stockholm next year, with a distinguished Canadian public servant, Maurice Strong, as Secretary-General of that Conference.
60.	Canada has a special interest in environmental questions, if only because we occupy such a large part of the
earth's surface. Despite its vast extent and relatively small ^ population, Canada has serious air- and water-pollution problems of its own. It also, inevitably, is a recipient of the pollution of others through the Great Lakes system and oil-spills on its coastlines, to name only two examples. This is why Canada is concerned about the inadequacy of existing international law relating to the preservation of the environment in general and the marine environment in particular.
61.	Canada is working toward the development of an adequate body of law in this field. At the national level, the Canadian Government has adopted laws for the protection of fisheries from the discharge or deposit of wastes, for the prevention of pollution disasters in Canada's territorial waters and fishing zones, and for the preservation of the delicate ecological balance of the Arctic. At the previous session of the General Assembly  and last month in a draft resolution submitted jointly with Norway to Subcommittee III of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction [AI8421, annex V, sect. II], Canada invited other States to take similar measures at the national level to prevent and control marine pollution as a move toward the development of effective international arrangements.
62.	Canada is working towards a multilateral treaty regime on safety of navigation and the prevention of pollution in Arctic waters, with other countries having special responsibilities in the Arctic regions.
63.	In a wider multilateral context, Canada is participating actively in the preparations for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, the IMCO International Conference on Marine Pollution and the third conference on the law of the sea. These three conferences, taken together, present a unique opportunity for the development of a comprehensive system of international environmental law. As the first and widest-ranging of the three, the Stockholm Conference will be of particular importance in helping States to come to grips with the apparent conflict between environmental preservation on the one hand and economic development on the other.
64.	Canada is usually and properly classed as a developed nation, but it is still in the course of development, still importing capital and know-how, still engaged in building its industrial base. This makes Canadians aware of the conflict between the need to develop, essential to economic growth, and the need to preserve and, where necessary, to recapture a viable natural environment, essential to the survival of life.
65.	For this reason Canada has a special understanding of the dilemma seen by the developing nations, where the highest priority must be given to economic and social development as the means to achieve a standard of living that will offer dignity and opportunity to all their citizens, and where the preservation of the physical, environment, however desirable in itself, would-seem to come second. But I would suggest that this dilemma is wrongly posed.
66.	Technology has now reached a stage where the industrialization needed for economic development need not disturb the environment to an unacceptable extent. And it is by no means the rule that an ecologically sound industrial or other project must be more costly than one that is not. With far-sighted planning and careful attention to design and ecological considerations there need be little or no added cost. The pollution befouling the Great Lakes system largely results from wasted opportunities, from dumping into the water by-products that in themselves have value if properly recovered. The Canadian Government is working with the Governments of the United States and of the United States and Canadian provinces bordering on the Great lakes system to establish water-quality standards, achieve them in the shortest possible time and see to it that they are maintained.
67.	The discussions now going on between the various levels of the Governments in Canada and the United States will set into motion a program for the rehabilitation and preservation of the Great Lakes which will cost billions of dollars and call upon vast human and technological resources. These astronomical expenses would not have been incurred had we and our neighbors been able to foresee and forestall the damage we have done to the largest fresh-water system on earth.
68.	I urge my friends in the developing nations to balance the costs of anti-pollution measures against the cost, of pollution and the mindless waste of limited resources it so often represents. Everyone in this room is looking and working for the day when the prosperity now enjoyed by the few can be shared by all. Economic and social development is the route to prosperity. We should all take advantage of the fact that advances in technology mean that we can follow this route without poisoning the air we breathe, the water we drink and the soil that gives us sustenance, without disturbing the ecological balance that supports all life.
69.	My third illustration of the universality of human problems is the whole field of arms control and disarmament. Canada firmly believes that, until the People's Republic of China is playing its part in our deliberations here and in the detailed studies and negotiations being carried on in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, agreements in this important area will be at best incomplete and at worst ineffective. This is not to downgrade the excellent work that has already been done, as evidenced by such achievements as the Treaty on the NGn-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof [resolution 2660 (XXV), annexJ, and the current work on a biological weapons treaty, in all of which Canada has had an active and essential part to play. Nor does it make any less welcome the encouraging and fundamental negotiations now taking place between the United States and the Soviet Union to curtail the strategic arms race.
70.	Earlier this month in Geneva I had the privilege of addressing the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. I took advantage of my being in Geneva to speak to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament at its 536th meeting about a subject to which my country attaches the greatest importance; the need for a complete ban on nuclear testing, including underground testing. This Assembly will soon be seized of the special report on nuclear testing [A/8457- DC/234] by the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and for this reason I should like to make again here some of the points I made in Geneva,
71.	Before a complete test-ban can be achieved, there are political and technical difficulties to be overcome. Canada is not alone in believing that these very difficulties call for s determined and speedy effort to reach a total ban on underground nuclear testing. There are steps which could be taken at once before international agreement is reached, steps we believe all Members of the United Nations would support. Those Governments which are conducting nuclear tests could limit both the size and the number of tests they are now carrying out, starting with the biggest, and announce such restraints publicly. This would represent no difficulty nor involve any complication.
72.	There is little time left to us to ensure that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons becomes fully effective. All the measures needed to make that Treaty viable should receive the highest priority, and the ending of all nuclear tests must come first. Many Governments are anxious to see all obstacles to the full implementation of the non-proliferation Treaty removed, before the precarious equilibrium among the nuclear weapons Powers is further disturbed whether by on-going scientific and technical developments or by the emergence of new nuclear Powers. Canada is at one with those Governments in their concern and in their determination.
73.	The continuation of nuclear weapons tests is at the root of the problem. The ending of all nuclear tests by all Governments in all environment is of the greatest possible importance for Canada and for the whole international community,
74.	The safety of all is the concern of all, For Canada there is, if possible, an additional concern. The detonation. by the Soviet Union in the last few days of a large underground nuclear explosion arid the possibility of a considerably larger test in our ov/n neighborhood by the United States emphasize that the rate and the size of underground testing on the increase. Competitive testing must not be advanced by the nuclear Powers as a justification for maintaining the momentum of the arms race. The danger is that it will, and this brings home to us all the urgent need for a complete ban on nuclear testing.
75.	I turn finally to my fourth illustration of the universality of problems today. I suggest that there is no part of the world and no country that is unaffected by the difficulties now being experienced in the monetary and trading arrangements arising out of the chronic balance-of- payments deficit of the United States. Developing countries are well aware that problems among the fortunate few are of great importance to them. They are affected directly in two ways: by the adverse effect upon development assistance and by increased barriers to the trade that, in the long run, offers the best possibility of economic betterment for their peoples,
76.	Socialist economies are steadily increasing their trade with market economies, to the benefit of all. As exchanges in the fields of science and technology multiply, the economies of all the world's nations become more inter- dependent-a trend that should be welcomed, not only for the immediate benefit' it brings; but also as a proven nrnns of reducing tensions.
77.	The truth is that all of us-rich or poor, developed and developing, with socialist or market economies-have an interest in minimizing obstacles to trade and in facilitating trade by the maintenance of a workable system of monetary exchanges. All of us suffer when trade is impeded by the setting up of new obstacles to its free flow or by instability in world monetary arrangements.
78.	Trade is more than a matter of dollars and cents, more than a struggle for economic advantage. It is the only means we have to create a world economy that will support all the world's inhabitants at a level that will enable us all to enjoy the social justice that is our birthright and to achieve fulfillment in peace and dignity. It is to that end that so much of the best work of the United Nations family has been directed in the past and it is this great goal which must continue to call forth all that is best in us for the future.




Let me first congratulate this body for electing Ambassador Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka to preside over this thirty-first session of the General Assembly. He is a diplomat of great, international stature who, among his many distinctions, has provided indispensable leadership to the crucial negotiations on the law of the sea.
144.	I would also like to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General for his tireless efforts on behalf of the world community. He successfully embodies the Charter's prin¬ciples of fairness, impartiality and dedication to the causes of global peace and human dignity.
145.	The United Nations was born of the conviction that peace is both indivisible and more than mere stability, that for peace to be lasting it must fulfill mankind's aspirations for justice, freedom, economic well-being, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. But the history of this Organization has been, in considerable measure, the gradual awareness that humanity would not inevitably share a single approach to these goals.
146.	The United Nations has survived-and helped to manage-30 years of vast change in the international system. It has come through the bitterness of the cold war. It has played a vital role in the dismantling of colonial empires. It has helped to moderate conflicts, and is even now manning truce lines in critical parts of the world. It has carried out unprecedented efforts in such areas as public health, development assistance and technical co-operation.
147.	But the most important challenge for this Organization still lies ahead: to vindicate mankind's positive and nobler goals and help nations to achieve a new understanding of community.
148.	With modern communications, human endeavor has become a single experience for peoples in every part of the globe. We share the wonders of science and technology, the trials of industrialization and social change, and a constant awareness of the fate and the dreams of our fellow men.
149.	The world has shrunk, but the nations of the world have not come closer together. Paradoxically, nationalism has been on the rise at the precise time when the most serious issues we all face can only be resolved through a recognition of our interdependence.
150.	Fragmentation has affected even this body. Nations have taken decisions on a bloc or regional basis, or by rigid ideologies, before even listening to the debate in these halls; on many issues positions have been predetermined by prior conferences containing more than half the membership of the United Nations. The tendency is widespread to come here for battle, rather than negotiation. If these trends continue, the hope for world community will dissipate and the moral influence of this Organization will progressively diminish.
151.	This would be a tragedy. Members of this Organization are today engaged in a multiplicity of endeavors to find just solutions for complex and explosive problems. There is a fragile tranquility, but beneath the surface it is challenged by fundamental forces of change -technological, economic and social. More than ever, this is a time for statecraft and restraint, for persistence but also for daring in the pursuit of peace and justice. The doctrines of perpetual strife produce only bloodshed and bitterness; they unleash the forces of destruction and repression and plant the seeds of future conflict. Appeals to hatred-  whether on the basis of race or class or color or nationality or ideology-will in the end rebound against those who launch them and will not advance the cause of freedom and justice in the world. 
152.	Let us never forget that the United Nations benefits the smaller and Weaker nations most of all; for without the rule of law, disputes will be settled as they hive been all too frequently and painfully in history: by tests of strength. It is not the weak that will prevail in s world of chaos.
153.	The United States believes that this thirty-First session of the General Assembly must free itself of the ideological and confrontational tactics that marked some of its predecessors and dedicate itself to a program of common action.
154.	The United States comes to the General Assembly prepared to work co-operatively on programs of common action. We will offer concrete proposals. We will listen carefully to the ideas of others. We will resist pressure and we shall seek co-operation.
155.	Let me, in this spirit, discuss the three principal challenges we face: the problem of peace, the challenge of economic well-being, and the agenda of global interdependence.
156.	The age of the United Nations has also been an age of frequent conflict. We have been spared a third world war, but we cannot assume that this condition will prevail forever or without exertion. Our generation must build out of the multitude of nations a structure of relations that frees the energies of nations and peoples for the positive endeavors of mankind, without die fear or the threat of war.
157.	Central to American foreign policy are our sister democracies, the industrial nations of North America, Western Europe, the southern Pacific and Japan, and our traditional friends in the Western Hemisphere. We are bound to these nations by ties of history, civilization, culture, shared principles and generations of common endeavors.
158.	Our alliances, founded on the bed-rock of mutual security, now reach beyond the common defense to a new range of issues: the social challenges shared by the advanced technological societies; common approaches to easing tensions with our adversaries; and shaping positive relations with the developing world. The common efforts of the industrial democracies are not directed at exclusive ends, but as a bridge to a broader, more secure and co-operative international system and to increasing freedom and prosperity for all nations.
159.	The United States is proud of its historical friendships in the Western Hemisphere. In the modern era these friendships must be, and they are, based on equality and mutual benefit. We have a unique advantage in this Hemisphere: the great dialog between the developed and the developing nations can find its most creative solution in the Hemisphere where modern democracy was born, and where co-operation between developed and developing, large and small, is a long-standing tradition.
160.	Throughout history, ideology and power have tempted nations to seek unilateral advantage. But the inescapable lesson of the nuclear age is that the politics of tests of strength has become incompatible with the survival of humanity. Traditional power politics becomes irrational when war can destroy civilized life and when neither side can gain a decisive strategic advantage.
161.	Accordingly, the great nuclear Powers have particular responsibilities for restraint and vision. They are in a position to know the full extent of the catastrophe which could overwhelm mankind. They must take care not to fuel disputes if they conduct their rivalries by traditional methods; if they turn local conflicts into aspects of a global competition, sooner or later their conflicts will grow out of control.
162.	The United States believes that the future of mankind requires coexistence with the Soviet Union. Tired slogans cannot obscure the necessity for a more constructive relationship. We will insist that restraint be reciprocal, not just in bilateral relations, but around the globe. There can be no selective detente. We will maintain our defenses and our vigilance. But we know also that tough rhetoric is not strength and that we owe future generations more hopeful prospects than a delicate equilibrium of awesome forces.
163.	Peace requires a balance of strategic power. This the United States will maintain. But the United States is convinced that the goal of strategic balance is achievable more safely by agreement than through an arms race. The negotiations on the limitation of armaments are therefore at the heart of United States-Soviet relations.
164.	Unprecedented agreements limiting and controlling nuclear weapons have been reached. An historic effort has been made to place a ceiling on the strategic arsenals of both sides in accordance with the Vladivostok communique of 24 November 1974. And once this is achieved we are ready to seek immediately to lower the levels of strategic arms.
165.	The United States welcomes the recent progress that has been made in further curtailing nuclear-weapons testing and in establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions for the first time. The two treaties now signed and awaiting ratification should be the basis for further progress in this field.
166.	Together with several of our European allies, we are continuing efforts to achieve a balanced reduction in the military forces facing each other in central Europe. In some respects this is the most complex negotiation on arms limitation yet undertaken. It is our hope that, through patient effort, reciprocal reductions will soon be achieved that enhance the security of all countries concerned.
167.	But coexistence and negotiations on the control of arms do not take place in a vacuum. We have been disturbed by the continuing accumulation of Soviet armaments and by recent instances of military intervention to tip the scales in local conflicts in distant continents. We have noted crude attempts to distort the purposes of peaceful diplomacy and to impede hopeful progress towards peaceful solutions to complex issues. These efforts only foster tensions; they cannot be reconciled with the policy of improving relations, and they will inevitably be
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
uneasy armistice, both sides must recognize that ideology and power politics today confront the realities of the nuclear age and that a striving for unilateral advantages will not be accepted.
168.	In recent years, the new relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China has held great significance for global security.
169.	We came together out of necessity and a mutual belief that the world should remain free of military blackmail and the will to hegemony. We have set out a new path -in wide-ranging consultations, bilateral exchanges, the opening of offices in our respective capitals and an accelerating movement towards normalization. And we have derived reciprocal benefits- a clearer understanding of the aspirations of our peoples, better prospects for international equilibrium, reduced tensions in Asia and increased opportunities for parallel actions on global issues.
170.	These elements form the basis for a growing and lasting relationship founded on objective common interest. The United States is committed to strengthen the bonds between us and to proceed towards the normalization of our relations in strict conformity with the principles of the Shanghai communique of 27 February 1972. As this process moves forward, each side must display restraint and respect for the interests and convictions of the other. We will keep Chinese interests in mind on all international issues and will do our utmost to take account of them. But if the relationship is to prosper, there must be similar sensitivity to our views and concerns.
171.	On this basis, the progressive development of our relations with the world's most populous nation will be a key element of the foreign policy of the United States.
172.	The world today is witness to continuing regional crises. Any one of them could blossom into larger conflict. Each one commands our most diligent efforts of conciliation and co-operation. The United States has played, and is prepared to continue to play, an active role in the search for peace in many areas -southern Africa, the Middle East, Korea and Cyprus. Let me deal with each of these.
173.	Racial injustice and the grudging retreat of colonial power have conspired to make southern Africa an acid test of the world's hope for peace and justice under the Charter. A host of voices have been heard in this chamber warning that, if we failed quickly to find solutions to the crises of Namibia and Rhodesia, that part cf the globe could become a battleground with consequences for every part of the world.
174.	I have just been to Africa, at President Ford's request, to see what the United States could do to help the peoples of that continent achieve their aspirations to freedom and justice.
175.	An opportunity to pull back from the brink now exists. I believe that Africa has before it the prize for which it has struggled so long-the opportunity for Africans to shape a future of peace, justice, racial harmony and progress.
176.	The United Nations since its beginning has been concerned with the issue of Namibia. For 30 years that Territory has been a test of this institution's ability to make its decisions effective.
177.	In recent months, the United States has vigorously sought to help the parties concerned speed up the process towards Namibian independence. The United States favors the following elements: the independence of Namibia within a fixed, short time-limit; the calling of a constitutional conference at a neutral location under the aegis of the United Nations; and the participation in that conference of all authentic national forces, including specifically the South West Africa People's Organization Progress has been made in achieving all those goals. We will exert our efforts to remove the remaining obstacles and bring into being a conference which can then fashion, with goodwill and wisdom, a design for the new State of Namibia and its relationship with its neighbors. We pledge our continued solicitude for the independence of Namibia so that it may, in the end, be a proud achievement of this Organization and a symbol of international co-operation.
178.	Less than a week ago the Rhodesian authorities announced that they were prepared to meet with the nationalist leaders of Zimbabwe to form an interim Government to bring about majority rule within two years. That is in itself an historic break from the past. The African Presidents, in calling for immediate negotiations, have shown that, they are prepared to seize this opportunity. And the Government of the United Kingdom, in expressing its willingness to assemble a conference, has shown its high sense of responsibility and concern for the rapid and just independence of Rhodesia.
179.	Inevitably, after a decade of strife, suspicions run deep; many obstacles remain. Magnanimity is never easy, and less so after a generation of bitterness and racial conflict. But let us not lose sight of what has been achieved: a commitment to majority rule within two years; a commitment to form immediately a transitional Government with an African majority in the cabinet and an African prime minister; and a readiness to follow that with a constitutional conference to define the legal framework of an independent Zimbabwe.
180.	The United States, together with other countries, has made major efforts; and we will continue to do what we can to support the hopeful process that is now possible. But it is those in Africa who must shape the future. The people of Rhodesia and the neighboring States now face a supreme challenge. Their ability to work together and their capacity to unify will be tested in the months ahead as never before.
181.	There may be some countries which see a chance for advantage in fueling the flames of war and racial hatred; but they are not motivated by concern for the peoples of Africa, or for peace. And if they succeed they could doom opportunities that might never return.
182.	In South Africa itself, the pace of change accelerates. The system of apartheid-by whatever name-is a denial of our common humanity and a challenge to the conscience of
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
have shown wisdom in facilitating a peaceful solution in Rhodesia. The world community takes note of it and urges similar wisdom-while there is still time-to bring racial justice to South Africa.
183.	As for the United States, we have become convinced that our values and our interests are best served by an Africa seeking its own destiny, free of outside intervention. Therefore we will back no faction, whether in Rhodesia or elsewhere; we will not seek to impose solutions anywhere. The leadership and the future of an independent Zimbabwe, as for the rest of Africa, are for Africans to decide. The United States will abide by their decision. We call on all other non-African States to do likewise.
184.	The United States wants no special position or sphere of influence in Africa. We respect African unity. The rivalry and interference of non-African Powers would make a mockery of Africa's hard-won struggle for independence from foreign domination. It will inevitably be resisted.
185.	Every nation which has signed the Charter is pledged to allow the nations of Africa, whose peoples have suffered so much, to fulfill at long last their dreams of independence, peace, unity and human dignity in their own way and by their own decisions.
186.	The United Nations, since its birth, has been involved in the chronic conflict in the Middle East. Each successive war has brought greater perils, an increased danger of great-Power confrontation and more severe economic dislocations.
187.	At the request of the parties, the United States has been actively engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East. Since the 1973 war, statesmanship on all sides has produced unprecedented steps towards a resolution of that conflict. There have been three agreements that lessen the danger of war; and mutual commitments have been made to pursue the negotiating process with urgency until a final peace is achieved. As a result, we are closer to the goal of peace than at any time in a generation.
188.	The role of the United Nations has been crucial. The Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East met in 1973 under its aegis, and the implementation of subsequent agreements has been negotiated in its working groups. Security Council resolutions form the only agreed framework for negotiations. I want to compliment the Secretary- General and his colleagues in New York, Geneva and on the ground in the Middle East for their vigorous support of the peace process at critical moments.
189.	The United States remains committed to help the parties reach a settlement. The step-by-step negotiations of the past three years have now brought us to a point where comprehensive solutions seem possible. The decision before us now is how the next phase of negotiations should be launched.
190.	The United States is prepared to participate in an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Conference. We think a a preparatory conference must be useful for a discussion of the structure and agenda of future negotiations; but we are open to other suggestions.
191.	The groundwork that has been laid represents an historic opportunity. The United States will do all it can to assure that by the time this Assembly meets next year it will be possible to report significant progress towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
192.	Since the General Assembly last met, overwhelming tragedy has befallen the people of Lebanon. The United States strongly supports the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that troubled country. We oppose partition. We hope that Lebanese affairs will soon be returned to the hands of the people of Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations, and all the conflicting parties in Lebanon, have an obligation to support the efforts of the new President of Lebanon to restore peace and to turn energies to rebuilding the nation. And the agencies of the United Nations system can play an important role in the reconstruction effort.
193.	The confrontation between North and South Korea remains a threat to international peace and stability. The vital interests of world Powers intersect in Korea: conflict there inevitably threatens wider war.
194.	We and many other United Nations Members welcome the fact that a contentious and sterile debate on Korea will be avoided this fall. Let this opportunity be used, then, to address the central problem of how the Korean people can determine their future and achieve their ultimate goal of peaceful reunification without a renewal of armed conflict.
195.	Our own views on the problem of Korea are well known. We have called for a resumption of a serious dialog between North and South Korea. We are prepared to have the United Nations Command dissoJved so long as the Armistice Agreement is either preserved or replaced by more durable arrangements. We are willing to improve relations with North Korea, provided that its allies are ready to take similar steps towards the Republic of Korea. We are ready to talk with North Korea about the peninsula's future, but we will not do so without the participation of the Republic of Korea.
196.	Last fall the United States proposed a conference including all the parties most directly concerned- North and South Korea, the United States, and the People's Republic of China to discuss ways of adapting the Armistice Agreement to new conditions and replacing it with more permanent arrangements.  On 22 July, I stated our readiness to meet immediately with those parties. I reaffirm that readiness here today.
197.	If such a conference proves impracticable right now, the United States would support a phased approach. Preliminary talks between North and South Korea, including discussions on the venue and scope of the conference, could start immediately. In that phase the United States and the People's Republic of China could participate as observers or in an advisory role, if the parties so desired. If such discussions yielded concrete results, the United States and China could join the talks formally. This, in turn, could set the stage for a wider conference in which other countries could associate themselves with arrangements that guarantee a durable peace on the peninsula.
198.	We hope that North Korea and other concerned parties will respond affirmatively to this proposed procedure or else offer an alternative suggestion.
199.	The world community is deeply concerned over the continuing stalemate on the Cyprus problem.
200.	Domestic pressures, nationalistic objectives, and international rivalries have combined to block the parties from taking even the most elementary steps towards a solution. On those few occasions when representatives of the two Cypriot communities have come together, they have fallen into inconclusive procedural disputes. The passage of time has served only to complicate domestic difficulties and to diminish the possibilities of constructive conciliation.
201.	All concerned need to focus on committing themselves to achieving the overriding objectives: assuring the well-being of the suffering Cypriot people and ensuring peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
202.	A settlement must come from the Cypriot communities themselves. It is they who must decide how their island's economy, society and government shall be reconstructed. It is they who must decide the ultimate relationship of the two communities.
203.	The United States is ready to assist in restoring momentum to the negotiating process. We believe that agreeing to a set of principles might help the parties to resume negotiations. We would suggest some concepts along the following lines. A settlement should preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The present dividing lines on Cyprus must be adjusted to reduce the area currently controlled by the Turkish side. The territorial arrangement should take into account the economic requirements and humanitarian concerns of the two Cypriot communities, including the plight of those who remain refugees. A constitutional arrangement should provide conditions under which the two Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs. Security arrangements should be agreed upon that would permit the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under international agreement.
204.	I have discussed this approach with the Secretary- General and with several Western European colleagues. In the days ahead, the United States will consult along these lines with all interested parties. In the meantime, we urge the Secretary-General to continue his dedicated efforts.
205.	I shall now turn to the problems of economic development. The economic division of our planet between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, between the industrial and developing nations is a dominant issue of our time. Our mutual dependence for our prosperity is a reality, not a slogan. It should summon our best efforts to make common progress, to bring mankind's dreams of a better life to closer reality in our lifetime.
206.	There are many reasons why co-operation has not made greater strides. The industrial democracies have sometimes been more willing to pay lip service to the challenge of development than to match rhetoric with real resources. The countries with non-market economies are quite prepared to undertake verbal assaults, but their performance is in inverse ratio to their rhetoric. Their real contribution to development assistance has been minimal. Last year, for example, the non-market economies provided only about 4 per cent of the public aid flowing to the developing nations. The developing nations are understandably frustrated and impatient with poverty, illiteracy and disease. But often they have made demands for change that are as confrontational as they are unrealistic. They sometimes speak of new economic orders as if growth were a quick fix requiring only that the world's wealth be properly redistributed through tests of strength instead of a process of self-help extending over decades. Ultimately, such tactics lose more than they gain, for they undermine the popular support in the industrial democracies which is imperative to provide the resources and market access -available nowhere else- to sustain development.
207.	I believe that the objectives of the developing nations and the objectives of the industrial nations are complementary. Indeed they must be, for neither side can achieve its aims at the expense of the other. They can be realized only through co-operation.
208.	We took a major step forward together a year ago at the seventh special session of this Assembly, and we have since followed through on many fronts. We have taken steps to protect the economic security of developing nations against cyclical financial disaster. The newly expanded compensatory finance facility of the International Monetary Fund has disbursed over $2 billion to developing nations in this year alone. Replenishments of the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank will provide additional resources for development. World-wide food aid has been expanded. With a United States contribution of $200 million, we have brought the International Fund for Agricultural Development close to operation.
209.	The United States has continued this process by putting forward a number of new proposals at the fourth session of UNCTAD in May 1976. We committed ourselves to improvements in the quality of aid. We agreed to a serious effort to improve markets of 18 basic commodities. These measures, undertaken since we met here just a year ago, assist, not with rhetoric and promises, but in practical and concrete ways, the peoples of the world that are struggling to throw off the chains of poverty.
210.	Much remains to be done. First, the application of science and technology is at the very heart of the development process. The United States, conscious of its pioneering role in technology, has put forward three basic principles, which we shall support with funds aid talent: to train individuals who can identify, select and manage the future technology of the developing world; to build both national and international institutions to create indigenous technology; and to spur the private sector to make its maximum contribution to the development and transfer of technological progress. 
211.	To achieve these goals, we are today extending an invitation to the world conference on science and technology for development, now scheduled for 1979, to meet in this country. In preparation for that meeting, we have asked members of the industrial, academic and professional scientific communities throughout the United States to meet in Washington in November. They will review the important initiatives this country can take to expand the technological base for development and they will strive to develop new approaches.
212.	Secondly, the ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris should be given new impetus. We are making several new proposals. We will seek to help nations facing severe debt burdens. We will advance new ideas for expanded co-operation in energy.
213.	Thirdly, the industrial democracies have been far too willing to wait for the demands of the developing countries rather than to advance their own proposals. Now, however, the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have, at the suggestion of the United States, agreed to examine long-range development planning and to develop a more coherent and comprehensive approach to global growth and economic justice.
214.	Fourthly, natural disasters each year take thousands of lives and cost billions of dollars. It strikes most those who can afford it least-the poorest peoples of the world. The United Nations has a unique capacity to address these global concerns and thus improve man's odds against nature. We urge this body to take the lead in strengthening international co-operation to prevent and alleviate natural calamity.
215.	Our dream is that all the children of the world can live with hope and widening opportunity. No nation can accomplish this alone; no group of nations can achieve it through confrontation. But together there is a chance for major progress-and in our generation.
216.	It is an irony of our time that an age of ideological and nationalistic rivalry has spawned as well a host of challenges that no nation can possibly solve by itself: the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology; the problems posed by the law of the sea; and the horrible new tool of tenor that cJiims innocent victims on every continent.
217.	The growing danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons raises stark questions about man's ability to ensure his very existence. We have lived through three perilous decades hi which the catastrophe of nuclear war has been avoided, despite ? strategic rivalry between a relatively few nations.
218.	But now a wholly new situation impends. Many nations have the potential to build nuclear weapons. If this potential were to materialize, threats to use nuclear weapons, fed by mutually reinforcing misconceptions, could become a recurrent feature of local conflicts in every' quarter of the globe. And there will be growing dangers of accidents, blackmail and nuclear terrorism.
219.	Unless current trends are altered rapidly, the likelihood of nuclear devastation could grow steadily in the years ahead. We must look to the roots of the problem. Since the 1973 energy crisis and drastic rise in oil prices, both developed and developing nations have seen in nuclear energy a means both of lowering the cost of electricity and of reducing reliance upon imported petroleum. In an age of growing nationalism some see the acquisition and expansion of nuclear power as symbols of enhanced national prestige, and, let us be frank, as a means to provide themselves a future option to acquire nuclear weapons.
220.	A nation that acquires the potential for a nuclear weapons capability must accept the consequences of its action. It is bound to trigger offsetting actions by its neighbors and stimulate broader proliferation, thereby accelerating a process that ultimately will undermine its own security. And it is disingenuous to label as 'peaceful' nuclear devices which obviously are capable of massive military destruction.
221.	Time is of the essence. In no area of international concern does the future of this planet depend more directly upon what this generation can do or fails to do. We must move on the following three broad fronts.
222.	First, international safeguards must be strengthened and strictly enforced. The supply and use of nuclear materials associated with civilian nuclear energy programs must be carefully safeguarded so that they will not be diverted. The physical security of nuclear materials must be increased. The International Atomic Energy Agency must receive the full support of all nations in making its safeguards effective. Any violator of these safeguards must face immediate and drastic penalties.
223.	Secondly, adherence to safeguards, while of prime importance, is no guarantee against future proliferation. We must continue our efforts to forge international restraints against the acquisition or transfer of reprocessing facilities and of enrichment facilities which produce highly enriched uranium.
224.	Thirdly, we must recognize that one of the principal incentives for seeking sensitive reprocessing and enrichment technology is the fear that essential non-sensitive materials will not be made available on a reliable basis. Nations that show their sense of international responsibility by accepting effective restraints have a right to expect a reliable. economical supply of peaceful nuclear reactors and associated non-sensitive fuel. The United States, as a principal supplier of these items, is prepared to be responsive in this regard.
225.	In the near future President Ford will announce a comprehensive American program for international action on non-proliferation that reconciles global aspirations for assured nuclear supply with global requirements for nuclear control. In that way we hope that the 9.tom can be seen once again as a boon, and not as a menace, to mankind.
226.	Another issue of vast global consequence is the law of the sea. The negotiations which have just recessed in New York represent one of the most important, complex
and ambitious diplomatic undertakings in history.

227.	We have traveled an extraordinary distance in these negotiations in recent years, thanks in no small part to the skill and dedication of the distinguished President of this Assembly. Agreement exists on key concepts: a 12-mile territorial sea; free passage over and through straits; a 200-mile economic zone; and important pollution controls. In many fields we have replaced ideological debates with serious efforts to find concrete solutions. And there is growing consensus that the outstanding problems must be solved at the next session.
228.	But there is hardly room for complacency. Important issues remain which, if not settled, could cause us to forfeit all our hard-won progress. The Conference has yet to agree on the balance between coastal-State and international rights in the economic zone; on the freedom of marine scientific research; on arrangements for dispute settlement; and, most crucially, on the regime for exploitation of the deep sea-beds.
229.	The United States has made major proposals to resolve the deep sea-bed issue. We have agreed that the sea-beds are the common heritage of all mankind We have proposed a dual system for the exploitation of sea-bed minerals by which half of the mining sites would be reserved for the International Authority and half could be developed by individual nations and their nationals on the basis of technical capacity. We have offered to find financing and to transfer the technology needed to make international mining a practical reality. And in light of the many uncertainties that lie ahead, we have proposed that there be a review-for example after 25 years-to determine whether the provisions on sea-bed mining are working equitably.
230.	In response, some nations have escalated their demands and the stridency with which they advocate them.
231.	I must say candidly that there are limits beyond which no American administration can, or will, go. If attempts are made to compel concessions which exceed those limits, unilateralism will become inevitable. Countries which have no technological capacity for mining the sea-beds in the foreseeable future should not seek to impose a doctrine of total internationalization on nations which alone have this capacity and which have voluntarily offered to share it. The United States has an interest in the progressive development of international law, stable order and global co-operation. We are prepared to make significant sacrifices for this- but these sacrifices cannot go beyond equitable bounds.
23*2. Let us therefore put aside delaying tactics and pressures and take the path of co-operation. If we have the vision to conclude a treaty considered fair and just by mankind, our labors will have profound meaning not only for the regimen of the oceans but for all efforts to build a peaceful, co-operative and prosperous international community. The United States will spend the interval between sessions of the Conference reviewing its positions and will approach other nations well in advance of the next session at the political level to establish the best possible conditions for success.
233.	A generation that dreams of world peace and economic progress is plagued by a new, brutal and indiscriminate form of violence: international terrorism. In the year since I last addressed this body there have been 11 hijackings, 19 kidnappings, 42 armed attacks and 112 bombings perpetrated by international terrorists. Over 70 people have lost their lives and over 200 have been injured.
234.	It is time this Organization said to the world that the vicious murder and abuse of innocents cannot be excused by the invocation of lofty motives. Criminal acts against humanity, whatever the professed objective, cannot be excused by any civilized nation.
235.	Hie threat of terrorism should be dealt with through the co-operative efforts of all countries. More stringent steps must be taken now to deny skyjackers and terrorists a safe haven. Additional measures are required to protect passengers in both transit and terminal areas, as well as in flight.
236.	The United States will support new initiatives which will ensure the safety of the innocent. The proposal of the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany against the taking of hostages [7th meeting, para.,113] deserves the most serious and sympathetic consideration of this Assembly.
237.	The United States will do everything within its power to work co-operatively in the United Nations and in other international bodies to put an end to terrorism. But we have an obligation to protect the lives of our citizens as they travel at home or abroad, and we intend to meet that obligation. If multilateral efforts are blocked, then the United States will be forced to act through its own legislative processes and in conjunction with others willing to join us.
238.	Terrorism is an international problem. It is inconceivable that an organization of the world's nations would fail to take effective action against it.
239.	The final measure of all we do together, of course, is man himself. Our common efforts to define, preserve and enhance respect for the rights of man thus represent an ultimate test of international co-operation.
240.	We Americans, in the year of our bicentennial, are conscious -and proud of our own traditions. Our founders wrote 200 years ago of the equality and inalienable rights of all men. Since then the ideals of liberty and democracy have become the universal and indestructible goals of mankind. But the plain truth -of tragic proportions-is that human rights are in jeopardy over most of the globe. Arbitrary arrest, denial of fundamental procedural rights, slave labor, the stifling of freedom of religion, racial injustice, political repression, the use of torture, and restraints on communications and expression these abuses are far too prevalent.
241.	The performance of the United Nations system in protecting human rights has fallen far short of what was envisaged when the Organization was founded. The principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are clear debates of this body and in other forums have been marred by hypocrisy, double standards and discrimination. Flagrant and consistent deprivation of human rights is no less grave in one country or one social system than in another. Nor is it more acceptable when practiced upon members of the same race than when inflicted by one race upon another.
242.	The international community has a unique role to play. The application of the standards of the Universal Declaration should be entrusted to fair and capable international bodies. But at the same time let us ensure that those bodies do not become platforms from which nations which are the worst transgressors pass judgment on the alleged shortcomings of others.
243.	Let us together pursue practical approaches: to build on the foundations already laid at previous sessions of the General Assembly and in the Commission on Human Rights to lessen the abominable practice of officially sanctioned torture; to promote acceptance of procedures for protecting the rights of people subject to detention, such as access to courts, counsel and families,-and their prompt release or fair and public trial; to improve the working procedures of international bodies concerned with human rights, so that they may function fairly and effectively; to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to meet the tragic problems of the ever growing number of refugees whose human rights have been stripped away by conflict in almost every continent. The United States pledges its firm support to these efforts.

244.	The challenge to statesmanship in this generation is to advance from the management of crises to the building of a stable and just international order, an order resting not on power but on restraint of power, not on the strength of arms but on the strength of the human spirit.
245.	Global forces of change now shape our future. Order will come in one of two ways: through its imposition by the strong and the ruthless or by the wise and far-sighted use of international institutions through which we enlarge the sphere of Common interests and enhance the sense of community.
246.	It is easy and tempting to press relentlessly for national advantage. It is infinitely more difficult to act in recognition of the rights of others.
247.	Throughout history the greatness of men and nations has been measured by their actions in times of acute peril. Today there is no single crisis to conquer. There is, Instead, a persisting challenge of staggering complexity: the need to create a universal community based on co-operation, peace and justice.
248.	If we falter, future generations will pay for our failure. If we succeed we shall have been worthy of the hopes of mankind.
249.	I am confident that we can succeed.
250.	And it is here, in the Assembly of nations, that we should begin.
Mr. President, in addressing this Assembly for the first time, I am conscious that you have given long and distinguished service to the United Nations. My delegation is confident that your knowledge and wisdom will contribute to the success of our deliberations and pledges its full co-operation to you in carrying out your duties.
55.	May I also welcome the newest Member of the United Nations-Seychelles. Canada looks forward to establishing friendly relations with the people and Government of that new Commonwealth country.
56.	I take this opportunity to express to the delegation of China the condolences of the Government and people of Canada on the death of Chairman Mao Tsetung. The world has lost a great man.
57.	This is a time of difficult adjustment for the United Nations. Our membership, with some notable exceptions, is virtually complete, yet there are pressures to define more strictly the obligations of membership. Efforts to adapt the procedures and structure of the United Nations to accommodate new policy priorities introduce new tensions in some traditional bodies and activities. Agreement on standards and principles of human rights is not matched by an equal determination to implement those standards without discrimination. The Security Council meets more frequently than before, but there is no comparable increase in the number of agreed resolutions. Acts of piracy and terror, both within and between States, undermine the principles of international law and behavior on which the United Nations Charter is based. The ideal of greater economic and social equality between nations is still far from translation into practice. And, finally, the choice between anarchy or order on the seas stands out before us in unmistakable clarity.
58.	Canada supports the objective of universality of membership. The Charter, it is true, speaks of certain conditions for membership, but my Government takes the view that all States which apply for membership ought to be given the benefit of the doubt, if such exists. Any question about the degree of independence of such States should be resolved on the basis of the opinion and practice of the majority of Member States.
59.	But Canada also believes that a Member, once admitted to membership, should remain a Member. We hold that it would be a dangerous precedent to recommend expulsion of a Member State on the grounds of violation of the principles of the Charter, unless that is the consensus of the whole membership. To purge this Organization of so-called unpopular Members could lead to the withdrawal of support by others and the paralysis of our activities. That is too high a price to pay.
60.	We also hear threats from time to time to suspend the right of Israel to participate in the General Assembly. Canada would oppose such action. To deprive Members of their rights in the General Assembly on grounds not justified by the Charter makes a mockery of the Assembly. Our purpose is to debate the issues, not to stifle them.
61.	One implication of universality of membership must be a willing acceptance of the obligations of membership, especially by those States which play a major role in the Organization. A responsible measure of participation in United Nations activities, especially those voluntary programs which relieve suffering or help to maintain the peace, is a sign of such willingness. As a matter of principle, Canada will maintain its full and complete support for all United Nations organs of which it is a member. We would regret any trend towards the boycotting of United Nations institutions, or the unilateral reduction of assessed contributions to United Nations agencies, even though certain of their activities may be regarded by some States as harmful or irregular.
62.	Nevertheless, we believe it is unwise to press resolutions to a vote on issues which deeply divide the membership. Canada regrets, tor example, that the campaign against racial discrimination, on which there is wide consensus, should be associated with Zionism, about which there is profound disagreement. If this link is maintained, my Government will not participate in the conference to be held in 1978 on racial discrimination.
63.	The structure of our Organization and the priorities which it follows from time to time must reflect change in the world situation and in the membership. The shift over the years towards economic and social priorities is therefore desirable and understandable. We hope that some restructuring of the economic and social sector of the United Nations will take place as a result.. We see merit in proposals to give a more central role to the Economic and Social Council and for arrangements in the Secretariat designed to support that role. It is not too soon to envisage the Economic and Social Council in permanent session, taking up groups of issues in some orderly fashion and giving close attention to the implementation. of decisions taken at United Nations social conferences. The recommendations of the Habitat Conference,  for example, of which Canada had the honor to act as host, require thorough and expert scrutiny.
64.	We recognize as well that many Members believe the Charter reflects better the world of 1945 than the world of today. We agree that useful changes might be made. But here, as in other matters, the best may be the enemy of the good. Canada takes the view that the present balance of power between the General Assembly and the Security Council, which is the central issue of the Charter reform, is preferable to any alternative. The question of the Council's membership may be debatable, but its powers and structure still serve us well. So, too, does the principle of equal rights in the General Assembly. If the United Nations is to evolve gradually into a body capable of making decisions which affect the vital interests of all States, it must follow procedures which give confidence to its Members that those interests are secure.
65.	The coming into force this year of the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex] is a major step forward for the United Nations. As a member of the Commission on Human Rights, Canada will now direct its efforts principally towards the protection of the rights defined in the Covenants and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. One obvious means is to make effective the investigative and appeal mechanisms that are now established. These mechanisms require that States be willing to accept impartial examination of their alleged failure to abide by their commitments. A court of human rights, as proposed by my German colleague, is a step we should consider. None of us has a perfect record. To fall short of the aspirations inscribed in the Covenants and the Declaration of Human Rights is not a matter for partisan polemics, but for sober assessment.
66.	The obstacles ahead are formidable. Appeals against violations of human rights can be a threat to the legitimacy of some Governments and an embarrassment to others. No State is immune to criticism in this regard, although some manage to deflect attention, while others become the center of attraction. Canada will speak out to the best of its knowledge without regard for power or favor. We attach particular importance to the full implementation of the terms of the Declaration on torture which the General Assembly adopted in 1975. 
67.	Our experience with peace-keeping has been different from our experience with human rights. The concepts and principles of United Nations peace-keeping have been the subject of strong disagreement, whereas the practice has been modestly successful.
68.	Threats to peace and security vary from year to year, but we are rarely able to claim that none exists. This year we have been shocked by the continuing loss of life in Lebanon. The United Nations has not been able to contribute to peacemaking efforts there but should remain ready to respond if the situation so requires.
69.	A few weeks ago southern Africa was on the verge of disaster. It may still be so. But I am sure we are all encouraged by the developments of recent days. I pay a tribute to the patient diplomacy of the Secretary of State of the United States and welcome the apparent change of mind in Pretoria and Salisbury which his efforts may have achieved. My Government agrees that the early independence of both Namibia and Rhodesia on the basis of majority rule and racial harmony is essential to the peace of Africa. It believes as well that South Africa must meet the legitimate political, social and economic demands of the majority of South Africans, supported by the virtually unanimous opinion of this Assembly, if such peace is to endure.
70.	In the Middle East the United Nations has no choice but to continue the peacekeeping duties authorized by the Security Council. We are encouraged at this time and were at this time last year, by the interim agreement reached between Egypt and Israel on the withdrawal of their forces from Sinai. We look forward to further negotiations which could lead eventually to a peace settlement on the basis of the principles agreed upon by the Security Council in its resolution 242 (1967), and which would take into account the legitimate concerns and interests of the Palestinian people. Whether negotiations are resumed bilaterally with the help of third-party mediation or whether they take place multilaterally in the presence of all the parties directly affected is less important than a joint determination by the States concerned to accept the necessity of establishing and maintaining peaceful relations between them. Pending the achievement of this objective, Canada will continue to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations and will oppose actions or initiatives which imperil the security and independence of States in the area, or make it more difficult for the United Nations to help in achieving a settlement.
71.	In Cyprus the United Nations Peace-keeping Force still faces a difficult situation. The parties to the dispute are no
closer to agreement now than before. The situation on the ground remains tense and dangerous. It is generally agreed that the United Nations Force plays a vital role, but the costs of the Force are running $40 million over the contributions collected. We believe strongly that all Member States, in particular the permanent members of the Security Council, should make appropriate contributions to duly authorized United Nations peace-keeping operations. The fact that only a dozen or so Governments have made payments to the United Nations Special Account for the first sue months of this year is not a record of which we can be proud. I can only conclude that, unless the dispute moves towards settlement soon, my Government will have to review its position as a troop contributor in Cyprus.
72.	We are concerned as well about continuing acts of terrorism throughout the world and about innocent people who have been threatened or killed.
73.	The General Assembly established a Committee four years ago to study both terrorism itself and its underlying causes.  The Committee came to no conclusions, and the Assembly has not even studied its report. We believe the Assembly should now concentrate on a single aspect of the problem in an effort to achieve concrete results.
74.	I therefore support the proposal of my colleague from the Federal Republic of Germany [7th meeting] that priority should be given to action against the taking of hostages, and that international agreement should be reached to ensure the punishment of those who engage in such acts wherever they seek refuge. But we must not forget that conventions against aerial hijacking already exist. If all States were to ratify them we could be more confident that such hijackings would stop.
75.	My predecessor spoke last year  of the 'totally unsatisfactory rate of progress in achieving disarmament measures' and said that the General Assembly must continue 'as a spur to action in the field of disarmament'. A year later the record is little better. In the words of our Secretary-General, 'the problem of armaments continues to present the most serious threat to a peaceful and orderly future for the world community' [see A/31/l/Add.l, sect. V]. We should be ready to explore new avenues, and in this spirit my Government is prepared to consider sympathetically a proposal to convene a special session of the General Assembly on disarmament in 1978.
76.	We must not delude ourselves, however, that the principal obstacles to progress on disarmament will be removed by discussion in this Assembly. These obstacles are the differences of view among States as to the best ways of ensuring their security. Our examination of ways of improving the role of the United Nations in the field of arms control and disarmament will have achieved little unless Member countries redouble their efforts to overcome those differences.
77.	At this mid-point in the Disarmament Decade the responsibility to address ourselves to the real obstacles to progress is shared by ail Members of this Organization. But this responsibility falls most heavily on the nuclear-weapon States and other States of military significance. Progress will be meager, , unless we re-examine traditional assumptions, take adequate account of the security concerns of others, and seize all opportunities for concrete action.
78.	All of us acknowledge that the money spent on weapons might be put to better use. Few of us reduce our defense budgets. To do so requires better understanding and mutual confidence. Such understanding and mutual confidence is difficult to achieve in the best of cases and not least in a world divided between wealth and poverty. That is why a common effort to accelerate the process of development and to reduce disparities is in the interest of all States.
79.	The fourth session of UNCTAD has now taken place. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation, of which my predecessor, Mr. MacEachen, has the honor to be Co-Chairman, along with Mr. Perez Guerrero of Venezuela, has been meeting since the conclusion of last year's General Assembly. It has not been an easy year. The results of the fourth session of UNCTAD were achieved with difficulty and the Paris Conference is not assured of success.
80.	Yet, our difficulties should not obscure the fact that we have made significant progress towards agreement on the nature of our agenda and priorities, despite the apparent lack of concrete achievement. If our preparation is thorough, and our approach to it sincere, achievement will be more likely to follow, provided that the requisite political will exists on all sides. It is now my earnest hope that the present phase of the Paris Conference will bear fruit.
81.	The work of the Paris Conference is proceeding in parallel with work in the larger international bodies associated with the United Nations system. Its participants are aware that they must retain a global perspective on the problems before them if non-participants in the Conference are to have confidence in its results, and if these are to influence the actions of Governments in the longer term.
82.	The Conference is part of a continuing process of negotiation aimed at narrowing the gap between rich and poor. The process is complex and it is permanent. Old problems will not disappear quickly and new problems will emerge. In the pursuit of a more equitable international economic system, Canada is prepared to commit its efforts and its resources.
83.	The fifth session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea ended here in New York a little while ago without agreement except to meet again for a further session in the spring of next year. Significant progress has been made on many issues, but the Conference remains deeply divided on other issues to a point where a strong sense of impatience and even despair has set in about the seemingly endless nature of these negotiations.
84.	Canada is strongly committed to the objective of the Conference-a new legal order for the oceans based on equity and sound management principles. As a major coastal State Canada is acutely conscious of the inadequacy of the old order, based largely on the concept of freedom of the seas, which developed 300 years ago but which has become, with the force of modern technology, license to foul the shores and ravage the fisheries of the oceans. As a Canadian from an Atlantic province, Newfoundland, which is heavily dependent upon the resources of the sea, I wish to leave this Assembly in no doubt about the strength of Canadian concerns on this matter.
85.	Gravely depleted fisheries resources off our coasts led to a decision by Canada to extend our fisheries jurisdiction out to 200 miles as of 1 January 1977. This action is being taken within the framework of a system of sound conservation and rational management which we have negotiated on a bilateral and regional level with major fishing States operating off the Canadian coast. This action is also consistent with a growing consensus among nations reflected in the provisions of the single negotiating text that emerged from the Conference on the Law of the Sea last year and which has been confirmed in this year's revised text.  Other States, including our immediate neighbors, have taken or announced similar action.
86.	There are positive features and areas of progress in the work of the Conference which, I must add, Mr. President, are in significant measure due to your own skillful and tireless efforts as President of the Conference. Although unduly protracted, because of differences on a narrowing list of unresolved, hard-core issues, the Conference process has seen the emergence of a growing international consensus on a variety of important matters, in addition to the fisheries provisions that I have mentioned. The concept of a 200-mile exclusive economic zone with important coastal- State powers has achieved broad acceptance. There is general recognition of the need for special controls against marine pollution in ice-covered areas such as the Canadian Arctic. The rights of States in respect of the mineral resources of their continental shelves extending out to the continental margin are widely accepted in the Conference, although differences remain on the definition of the margin and on proposals for revenue-sharing in areas beyond 200 miles.
87.	A major remaining obstacle to further progress has been the deadlock on the question of mining the rich resources of the deep sea-bed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. On this and other unfinished business we must find internationally agreed solutions to avert a serious risk of conflict and for the benefit of all mankind. The process may be long and many are weary, but we must not flag in the effort to achieve agreement on an overall regime for the oceans at the moment when, finally, success may be within our grasp.
88.	I have spoken about our hopes and disappointments as Members of the United Nations. I conclude with the pledge that Canada will continue to be a loyal and, I trust, constructive Member. The United Nations suits Canada. We are a country of many peoples and cultures. We understand the meaning of compromise and consensus. We prize the opportunity to cultivate relations with near and distant friends. We remain committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter.
﻿27.	 I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. I assure you of the full co-operation of the Canadian delegation in the discharge of your duties. You can count on our support in your efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the Assembly, a concern which you emphasized last week in your opening address.
28.	I would also like to welcome Saint Christopher and Nevis as the 158th Member of the United Nations. St. Kitts is a hemisphere neighbour, a Commonwealth partner and a close friend to many Canadian visitors.
29.	We meet at a time of heightened tension. The urgency of many world problems has intensified since last year. The need for a dynamic United Nations has never been greater.
30.	One year ago the Secretary-General inspired us to take a hard look at the Organization. We measured expectations against realities and, to no one's surprise, found ourselves wanting. We recognized that we were in the midst of what the Secretary-General called, in his reports a 'crisis in the multilateral approach in international affairs'. We unanimously agreed on the imperative need to strengthen the role and effectiveness of the United Nations. We have not yet succeeded. It is now time to move from high-sounding generalities on which we can all agree to specific measures for strengthening the multilateral system.
31.	The reputation of the United Nations is widely measured by its contribution to peace and security. We must turn around the current perception that the United Nations cannot respond forcefully to crisis and conflict. We must make more creative use of the existing provisions and mechanisms of the Charter.
32.	The key is the Security Council and the way in which the Secretary-General works with the Council and the members work with each other. Council members have been seeking ways to make the work of the Council more effective. It will be unfortunate if political realities prevent any significant improvements. We count upon the members of the Council, particularly its permanent members, to exercise their responsibilities on behalf of all Member States.
33.	Is it naive to demand an enhanced spirit of cooperation and acceptance of responsibilities in the Council? One wonders, in the light of recent events. The world will not soon forget that the Council was prevented from taking action on the destruction of a civil aircraft by the Soviet Union. We cannot write off this particular Soviet veto as a harsh fact of life. This exercise of the veto was callously irresponsible. It prevented the Council from taking action to preserve the safety of international civil aviation.
34.	Canadians continue to be outraged by the tragedy of 1 September. On 12 September the Canadian House of Commons unanimously condemned 'the unwarranted attack on and destruction of the Korean airliner on the orders of Soviet authorities'. The House of Commons demanded 'a full and truthful explanation of this brutal act from the Soviet Government'. It demanded that 'the Soviet Government co-operate fully in any impartial investigation under the auspices of the United Nations and of the International Civil Aviation Organization to prevent any repetition of such a tragedy'. And the Canadian Parliament also demanded that 'the Soviet authorities immediately offer full and generous compensation to the families of all victims, including Canadians'. The text of this resolution was distributed on 13 September as a document of the Security Council and is available to all United Nations Members.
35.	Canadians are dismayed by the continuing failure of the Soviet Government to respond to official Canadian communications on this matter. A TASS report is an insulting response to a reasonable request for information.
36.	One United Nations agency, ICAO, is undertaking an urgent and impartial investigation to determine the facts of the tragedy. It is also reviewing ways of preventing a recurrence of this tragedy. Canadians expect the Soviet authorities to co-operate fully with ICAO.
37.	The ineffectiveness of the Council in dealing with the Korean Air Lines incident demonstrates once again the need to find more flexible and creative ways for Council members to address disputes. I would hope that agreement could be reached among Council members on the following specific measures: First, the Secretary- General should be encouraged to make greater use of Ms authority under Article 99 to bring current or potential crisis situations to the attention of the Council. To do this, he requires a greater fact-finding capacity. Secondly, the Council should meet informally to avert potential crises by examining incipient disputes during /n camera sessions with the Secretary-General. Thirdly, the Secretary- General requires additional personnel and resources for more effective use of his good offices in the resolution of disputes.
38.	These are not revolutionary steps. They can be taken on the basis of existing authority and by reallocating resources. But they would be useful and concrete and would facilitate the tangible progress on specific problems that is so urgently required. The Secretary-General has shouldered his responsibilities in an exemplary fashion. He does not, however, possess supernatural or, alas, supra-national powers. We, as Member Governments, must also shoulder our responsibilities.
39.	The Secretary-General has just reported on one problem crying out for a solution—that of Namibia. It is almost five years to the day since the Security Council adopted resolution 435 (1978). The outstanding issues regarding its implementation have, in substance, been resolved. All the parties have made concessions to achieve this result.
40.	There is no excuse now for further delay. South Africa's pre-condition for implementation, the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola, cannot legitimize its illegal occupation of Namibia. The question of principle is clear. Namibia should have its independence regardless of what happens or does not happen in Angola.
41.	The Secretary-General has spelt out the political realities very clearly in his report to the Security Council further disastrous consequences will result if we do not quickly reach the stage of implementation, and reaching this stage will require a determined effort by all concerned and particularly by those directly concerned.
42.	The first step is clear. South Africa must end its incursions into Angola and its interventions there. It cannot seek unilaterally to reshape the region; boundaries and sovereignties must remain inviolate.
43.	Secondly, the President of Angola has reaffirmed that his country has no desire to rely on foreign troops or keep them on its soil once Angola is no longer threatened. Measures to strengthen confidence and lessen tensions between those directly concerned are urgently needed.
44.	Thirdly, the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) during 1984 is the essential step. Without this, there cannot be peace in the region. Those who seek peace will meet this challenge.
45.	A fourth step should follow. UNCTAD is at present studying Namibia's economic and social needs. The international community will need to provide assistance to an independent Namibia, and Canada stands ready to play its part.
46.	The occupation of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, and of Kampuchea by Viet Nam, persist in defiance of the Assembly's resolutions. The countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, as recently as last week have made constructive proposals aimed at a solution to the Kampuchean situation
On Afghanistan, the Secretary-General and his personal representative have made an effort to get a real dialogue going. The achievement of an equitable solution, however, will require the demonstration of a greater sense of responsibility on the part of the Soviet Union.
47.	Canadians have participated in 15 United Nations peace-keeping forces and observation teams. Peacekeeping can be an important part of promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. The presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, for example, has prevented a recurrence of intercommunal fighting and has helped to maintain law and order. However, there is still no solution to the fundamental problems of the island. The Secretary-General and his representative have recently provided useful ideas on how a settlement can be reached. But until the parties themselves are prepared to make a serious commitment to negotiations, no just and lasting settlement can be found. Peace-making must be seen to go hand-in-hand with peace-keeping.
48.	Of course, the alarming course of events in Central America continues to preoccupy us. Political solutions to the region's problems are slow to emerge. For this reason we have welcomed the initiatives of the Contadora Group, working with the five countries of Central America to find a path toward reconciliation. We are convinced that lasting solutions to the region's problems can be arranged only by the countries of the region—that approach is fully consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. The Contadora initiative provides a basic framework for stability and co-operation within which the root causes of the region's problems can be attacked more constructively than by military meanings.
49.	One factor critical to the success of the Contadora initiative will be a positive response from all parties to
President Reagan's welcome offer of verifiable demilitarization. There has been some response both from Nicaragua and Cuba but, as yet, no dialogue nor any decrease in military activity. This is essential if an effective settlement in Central America is to be achieved. Canada would support concrete proposals by the Contadora Group to stop the process of militarization and to verify and monitor the progressive withdrawal of all foreign military personnel from the region.
50.	Canada is committed to supporting these regional mechanisms. If renewed efforts by the five countries of Central America could lead to agreement among them on a common approach to economic and social planning, Canada would increase its contribution to the necessary regional infrastructure projects. We are more than willing to continue to help all countries there to solve their problems by themselves. But assistance to these countries will be effective only once they have jointly decided to reject outside military involvement. A common effort of this sort could help to restore the political stability and confidence without which programmes for development cannot succeed.
51.	Perhaps no issues have more frustrated this Organization than the successive crises in the Middle East. The situation in Lebanon has been particularly tragic. We hope that the cease-fire just arranged will hold. The internal problems of this country have been complicated by others in the region who have chosen, at Lebanon's expense, ruthlessly to pursue their own interests on Lebanese soil. Canada strongly supports Lebanon's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. Foreign troops must withdraw unless they are present at the specific request of the legitimate Government of that country. We must all actively support, through the United Nations and by any other means open to us, the search for a just solution based on national reconciliation.
52.	Nor can we allow events elsewhere to deflect our attention from the Arab-Israeli conflict. Nothing has occurred in the 12 months since we last gathered to lessen the burning need for a lasting solution which assures the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to a homeland in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. I encourage all parties to exercise restraint. I call on Israel to rethink its policy on settlements. I urge all parties to enter into genuine negotiations. I call on them to make clear, in unambiguous terms, their readiness to accept the right of all States in the area, including Israel, to exist in security and peace.
53.	Questions of disarmament and arms limitation have become the central preoccupation of our time. Negotiations between the major Powers have yet to show significant progress. President Reagan's announcement yesterday provides some encouragement that movement may be possible on the question of intermediate-range nuclear weapons. The proposals he advanced are an important step forward and demonstrate a constructive flexibility on the United States side which, we hope, will be matched on the Soviet side,
54.	The major Powers have the paramount contribution to make in disarmament and arms limitation. At the same time, we must ensure that multilateral negotiations, under United Nations auspices, serve to reinforce the arms control and disarmament process. Machinery already exists for this purpose, but it has to work more effectively. The Committee on Disarmament, for example, has shown mixed results over the past year.
55.	I regret that a working group on arms control and outer space was not established this year by the Committee on Disarmament. Prime Minister Trudeau warned us at the twelfth special session, devoted to disarmament, that 'we cannot wait much longer if we are to be successful in foreclosing the prospect of space wars'. This issue is urgent if we are to succeed in keeping outer space off limits to weapons of war. I commend the Committee's Group of 21 for their recognition of this urgency.
56.	Having submitted a substantive working paper on this subject in 1982 Canada has continued its research programme on both the legal and technical aspects. We urge the establishment of a working group early in the 1984 session and are prepared to co-operate fully in the detailed examination of the issues.
57.	The Committee on Disarmament did make significant progress in the area of chemical weapons. Thanks to the co-operation extended to the Canadian chairman of the Committee's Working Group on Chemical Weapons, we now have for the first time a complete document which outlines the elements of a convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their destruction. The Working Group has been given the task of undertaking, immediately at the outset of 1984, intensive negotiations on the text of a convention.
58.	Canada's concern with the need to eliminate chemical warfare is of longstanding. It goes back to the First World War, when Canadian forces were subjected to the first massive gas attack. Since then, technological developments have made chemical weapons even more pernicious, as events in South-East Asia in recent years have unfortunately demonstrated. It would be a real achievement if a draft convention on chemical weapons could be agreed upon by the end of 1984. We recognize also the absolute necessity of verification if we are going to make real progress in international disarmament and arms control negotiations. Since the Second World War, Canada has attached special importance to the development of international verification mechanisms and has assigned a high priority to research in this area. We have been making available increased funding for research which will help in the technical and practical aspects of verification. We hope that by sharing the results of our work through the Committee on Disarmament we shall make a real contribution to the Committee's effectiveness.
59.	Multilateral institutions face the same challenges in the economic as in the political sphere. We have started to meet the challenge. International co-operation has been strengthened through the most intensive round of high- level economic consultations in several years. The series of meetings beginning with the joint IMF/IBRD meeting at Toronto in September last year and moving on to the first ministerial meeting in 10 years of the parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and then to the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries at New Delhi and the Summit of Industrialized Countries at Williamsburg and to the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has been an exhausting but worthwhile experience.
6? These consultations have encouraged mutually rein forming national action in a number of sectors. There has been a welcome drop in inflation and nominal interest rates. In the debt area, we have seen an outstanding co-operative effort in handling major simultaneous rescheduling. IMF has performed with vigour and resilience. Developing countries have adopted courageous adjustment programmes to restore their payments equilibrium. International financial institutions and bilateral donors have kept open the flow of resources for development. The GATT ministerial meeting compelled Governments to take a hard look at their own behaviour and elicited renewed commitments to the open multilateral trading system. At the Williamsburg summit the major Western nations agreed on the vital interdependence of the world economy. The developing countries, seriously affected by the world recession, must be full partners in global recovery.
64.	There is, of course, no room for complacency. As I stated at the session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Belgrade, there are no quick fixes to problems which are deep and ingrained in the world economy. To turn this partial and uneven recovery into one that is durable and widespread, we shall need action on many fronts. Continuing efforts are essential to reduce interest rates. In responding to the debt problem, we must ensure an adequate flow of funds to the debtor countries to support their adjustment efforts. Adequate official funds must be made available through IMF and the development institutions, especially to the low-income countries, while commercial banks must continue to play an important role in international financing. The needs of the International Development Association are particularly acute. For its part, Canada has recommitted itself to increasing Canada's official development assistance to 0.5 per cent of the gross national product by 1985 and to make best efforts to achieve 0.7 per cent by 1990. We have today deposited our instrument of ratification of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities.
65.	In trade, the task ahead for our Governments and international institutions is to work together to carry out and monitor the commitments we have already made. It is positive action, not just pledges, that will build confidence in the trading system and contribute to economic recovery. Canada is actively supporting efforts in GATT and elsewhere to monitor commitments to resist protectionism. If individual Governments are to resist protectionist pressures, they need to know that they are engaged in a genuine collective effort and are not simply standing alone. We are mindful of the vital role of trade in the process of global economic development and of the contribution which export earnings can make to relieving severe strains on the payments balance of many countries. These efforts require our attention and resolve.
66.	There is another area where co-operation must be nurtured. This is producer-consumer co-operation on petroleum. Repeated energy price shocks have been an important cause of accelerating inflation, lower real growth, the debt crisis and the muting of the North-South dialogue. We are now facing an opportunity for producers and consumers to work together, as a reflection of overwhelming common interests, in conservation and assurance of supply and a fair, stable long-term price. There is now a greater spirit of realism in consumer- producer relations that offers some hope for pragmatic discussion of oil and related concerns in the coming years.
67.	The international community has spent far too much time trying to devise new machinery and not enough in making what we have work better. I am encouraged by the pragmatic direction that the debate on reform of the international financial system has taken. The Commonwealth Study Group's report on challenges for the world's financial and trading system represents a most useful recent contribution to this debate. Many of its recommendations are aimed, in the first instance, at bringing about greater multilateral co-operation within the parameters of the present institutional system.
68.	The same concern—to make existing institutions work better—has prompted the efforts by my country within the Governing Council of UNDP to achieve a more assured system of funding for that institution and to reinforce its role as a central fund for all United Nations technical assistance activities for development. We likewise attach importance to the current triennial review of the operational development activities to the United Nations system. This review provides an opportunity to reassert a coherent sense of purpose and direction to practical co-operation between North and South.
69.	I have emphasized the most difficult issues of peace and security and economic co-operation. We should, however, balance our natural concern with these problem areas by recognizing and giving wider publicity to the ongoing achievements of the United Nations system. Too often what has been accomplished has been taken for granted. I should like to cite a few examples.
70.	First, the United Nations specialized agencies continue to spearhead international co-operation in many vital technical areas. ICAO is the more recent case in point. It is important for us to ensure that the specialized agencies succeed in preventing extraneous political issues from diverting them from their principal tasks.
71.	Secondly, slow but steady progress has been made, since the approval of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, towards the creation of a body of international treaties, mechanisms and procedures which should eventually cover all flagrant violations of human rights. No Government can claim any longer that human rights abuses are solely within their domestic jurisdiction. The work of the United Nations in human rights goes hand in hand with its efforts in the co-ordination of humanitarian assistance to refugees and in cases of natural or man-made disasters. 
72.	Thirdly, the United Nations system remains in the vanguard of the progressive development of international law. Pioneering legal regimes have been established in crucial fields such as the law of the sea, outer space, civil aviation, telecommunications and trade. However, if the system is going to keep pace with new developments and technologies, legal considerations will have to take precedence over political objectives.
73.	Fourthly, the United Nations system is also actively facilitating international co-operation in coming to grips with the most persistent problems facing society. One innovative proposal, which will be considered by the General Assembly at this session, is for the establishment of an international commission on the environment. The commission would address one of the major challenges facing the international community by studying the impact of economic and social development on the world's environment up to and beyond the year 2000.
74.	If the United Nations system is to deal effectively with the panoply of current issues, we the Member States must not stray from the basic ground of the system. Universality of membership remains fundamental to the viability of the system. As stated in Article 4 of the Charter, membership in the United Nations should be open to all peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the Charter, and this description certainly applies to the Republic of Korea, which, in its reaction to the calamity of 1 September and in its other actions, has demonstrated clearly its sense of responsibility and its desire for peace.
75.	Another basic obligation of membership is that Member States must pay their assessed shares of United
Nations budgets and resist the temptation to refuse selectively to pay their shares of certain parts of those budgets. Otherwise, the system will be undermined.
76.	This week, many heads of State and Government, including my own Prime Minister, are conferring here in New York. They have not lost faith in the multilateral institutions we have so painstakingly constructed. The United Nations system may be far from becoming, as some would hope, a world government which can enforce its decisions. But it is also far from being dominated, as others would have us believe, by a 'tyranny of the majority'. We must dig beneath these slogans. We must reinvigorate our multilateral institutions in practical ways, and, certainly, Canada is prepared to join in activities aimed at reaching that goal.
 

﻿1.	Thank you for granting me the honor of speaking today, on this first day of the general debate at the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly. Once again I come before this body preoccupied with peace. Last year I stood in this chamber to address the special session on disarmament. I have come today to renew my nation's commitment to peace. I have come to discuss how we can keep faith with the dreams that created this Organization.
2.	The United Nations was founded in the aftermath of the Second World War to protect future generations from the scourge of war, to promote political self- determination and global prosperity, and to strengthen the bonds of civility among nations. The founders sought to replace a world at war with a world of civilized order. They hoped that a world of relentless conflict would give way to a new era, one where freedom from violence prevailed.
3.	Whatever challenges the world was bound to face, the founders intended this body to stand for certain values, even if they could not be enforced, and to condemn violence, even if it could not be stopped. This body was to speak with the voice of moral authority. That was to be its greatest power.
4.	But the awful truth is that the use of violence for political gain has become more, not less, widespread in the last decade. Events of recent weeks have presented new, unwelcome evidence of brutal disregard for life and truth. They have offered unwanted testimony on how divided and dangerous our world is, how quick the recourse to violence.
5.	What has happened to the dreams of the founders of the United Nations?
6.	What has happened to the spirit which created the United Nations?
7.	The answer is clear: Governments got in the way of the dreams of the people. Dreams became issues of East versus West. Hopes became political rhetoric. Progress became a search for power and domination. Somewhere the truth was lost that people do not make war, governments do.
8.	And today, in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the North Pacific, the weapons of war shatter the security of the peoples who live there, endanger the peace of neighbors, and create ever more arenas of confrontation between the great Powers. During the past year alone, violent conflicts have occurred in the hills around Beirut, the deserts of Chad and the Western Sahara, in the mountains of El Salvador, the streets of Suriname, the cities and countryside of Afghanistan, the borders of Kampuchea, and the battlefields of Iran and Iraq.
9.	We cannot count on the instinct for survival to protect us against war. Despite all the wasted lives and hopes that war produces, it has remained a regular, if horribly costly, means by which nations have sought to settle their disputes or advance their goals.
10.	And the progress in weapons technology has far outstripped the progress toward peace. In modern times, a new, more terrifying element has entered into the calculations—nuclear weapons. A nuclear war cannot be won and it must never be fought. I believe that if governments are determined to deter and prevent war, there will not be war. Nothing is more in keeping with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations than arms control.
11.	When I spoke before the twelfth special session, devoted to disarmament. I affirmed the United States Government's commitment, and my personal commitment, to reduce nuclear arms, and to negotiate in good faith toward that end.
12.	Today, I reaffirm those commitments. The United States has already reduced the number of its nuclear weapons worldwide and, while replacement of older weapons is unavoidable, we wish to negotiate arms reduction; and to achieve significant, equitable, verifiable arms control agreements. And let me add, we must ensure that world security is not undermined by the further spread of nuclear weapons. Nuclear non-proliferation must not be the forgotten element of the world's arms control agenda
13.	At my last visit here, I expressed hope that a whole class of weapons systems—the longer-range intermediate nuclear forces—could be banned from the face of the earth. I believe that to relieve the deep concern of peoples in both Europe and Asia, the time was right, for the first time in history, to resolve a security threat exclusively through arms control. I still believe the elimination of these weapons—the zero option—is the best, fairest, most practical solution to the problem. Unfortunately, the Soviet Union declined to accept the total elimination of this class of weapons.
14.	When I was here last, I hoped that the critical Strategic Arms Reduction Talks would focus, and urgently so, on those systems that carry the greatest risk of nuclear war—the fast-flying, accurate, intercontinental ballistic missiles which pose a first strike potential. I also hoped the negotiations could reduce by one half the number of strategic missiles on each side and reduce their warheads by one third. Again, I was disappointed when the Soviets declined to consider such deep cuts, and refused as well to concentrate on these most dangerous destabilizing weapons.
15.	Despite the rebuffs, the United States has not abandoned and will not abandon the search for meaningful arms control agreements. Last June, I proposed a new approach toward the START negotiations. We did not alter our objective of substantial reductions, but we recognized that there are a variety of ways to achieve this end. During the last round of Geneva talks, we presented a draft treaty which responded to a number of concerns raised by the Soviet Union. We will continue to build upon this initiative.
16.	Similarly, in our negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces, when the Soviet leaders adamantly refused to consider the total elimination of these weapons, the United States made a new offer. We proposed, as an interim solution, some equal number on both sides between one and 572. We recommended the lowest possible level. Once again, the Soviets refused an equitable solution and proposed instead what might be called a 'half zero option'—zero for us, and many hundreds of warheads for them. That is where things stand today, but I still have not given up hope that the Soviet Union will enter into serious negotiations.
17.	We are determined to spare no effort to achieve a sound, equitable and verifiable agreement. For this reason, I have given new instructions to Mr. Nitze at Geneva, telling him to put forward a package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These initiatives build on the interim framework that the United States advanced last March and address concerns that the Soviets have raised at the bargaining table in the past.
18.	Specifically, first, the United States proposes a new initiative on global limits. If the Soviet Union agrees to reductions and limits on a global basis, the United States for its part will not offset the entire Soviet global missile deployment through United States deployments in Europe. We would, of course, retain the right to deploy missiles elsewhere.
19.	Second, the United States is prepared to be more flexible on the content of the current talks. The United States will consider mutually acceptable ways to address the Soviet desire that an agreement should limit aircraft as well as missiles,
20.	Third, the United States will address the mix of missiles that would result from reductions. In the context of reductions to equal levels, we are prepared to reduce the number of Pershing II ballistic missiles as well as ground-launched cruise missiles.
21.	I have decided to put forward these important initiatives after full and extensive consultations with our allies, including personal correspondence that I have had with the leaders of the Governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Japan and frequent meetings of the NATO Special Consultative Group. I have also stayed in close touch with other concerned friends and allies. The door to an agreement is open. It is time for the Soviet Union to walk through it.
22.	I want to make an unequivocal pledge to those gathered today in this world arena. The United States seeks and will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We are ready to be flexible in our approach—indeed, willing to compromise. We cannot, however, especially in light of recent events, compromise on the necessity of effective verification.
23.	Reactions to the Korean airliner tragedy are a timely reminder of just how different the Soviets' concept of truth and international co-operation is from that of the rest of the world. Evidence abounds that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated with the Soviet Union will be fulfilled. We negotiated the Helsinki Final Act,' but the promised freedoms have not been provided and those in the Soviet Union who sought to monitor their fulfillment languish in prison. We negotiated a biological weapons convention, but deadly yellow rain and other toxic agents fall on Hmong villages and Afghan encampments. We have negotiated arms agreements, but the high level of Soviet encoding hides the information needed for their verification. A newly discovered radar facility and a new inter-continental ballistic missile raise serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements already negotiated.
24.	Peace cannot be served by pseudo-control of arms. We need reliable, reciprocal reductions. I call upon the Soviet Union today to reduce the tensions it has heaped on the world in the past few weeks and to show a firm commitment to peace by coming to the bargaining table with a new understanding of its obligations. I urge it to match our flexibility. If the Soviets sit down at the bargaining table seeking genuine arms reductions, there will be arms reductions. The Governments of the West and their peoples will not be diverted by misinformation and threats. The time has come for the Soviet Union to show proof that it wants arms control in reality, not just in rhetoric.
25.	Meaningful arms control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would make our world less dangerous; so would a number of confidence- building steps that we have already proposed to the Soviet Union.
26.	Arms control requires a spirit beyond narrow national interests. This spirit is a basic pillar on which the United Nations was founded. We seek a return to this spirit. A fundamental step would be a true non-alignment of the United Nations. This would signal a return to the true values of the Charter, including the principle of universality. The Members of the United Nations must be aligned on the side of justice, rather than injustice; peace, rather than aggression; human dignity, rather than subjugation. Any other alignment is beneath the purpose of this great body and destructive of the harmony that it seeks. What harms the Charter harms peace.
27.	The founders of the United Nations expected that Member nations would behave and vote as individuals, after they had weighed the merits of an issue—rather like a great, global town meeting. The emergence of blocs and the polarization of the United Nations undermine all that the Organization initially valued.
28.	We must remember that the Movement of Non- Aligned Countries was founded to counter the development of blocs and to promote cooperation between them. Its founders spoke of the right of smaller countries not to become involved in others' disagreements. Since then, membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has grown dramatically, but not all the new members have shared the founders' commitment of genuine non- alignment. Indeed, client Governments of the Soviet Union which have long since lost their independence have flocked into the Movement and once inside have worked against its true purpose. Pseudo non-alignment is no better than pseudo-control of arms.
29.	The United States rejects as false and misleading the view of the world as divided between the empires of the East and the West. We reject it on factual grounds. The United States does not head any bloc of subservient nations, nor do we desire to. What is called 'the West' is a free alliance of Governments, most of which are democratic and all of which greatly value their independence. What is called 'the East' is an empire directed from the center, which is Moscow. 
30.	The United States today, as in the past, is a champion of freedom and self-determination for all peoples. We welcome diversity; we support the right of all nations to define and pursue their national goals. We respect their decisions and their sovereignty, asking only that they respect the decisions and sovereignty of others. Just look at the world over the last 30 years and then decide for yourselves whether the United States or the Soviet Union has pursued an expansionist policy.
31.	Today, the United States contributes to peace by supporting collective efforts by the international community. We give our unwavering support to the peacekeeping efforts of this body, as well as to other multilateral peace-keeping efforts around the world. The United Nations has a proud history of promoting conciliation and helping keep the peace. Today, United Nations peace-keeping forces or observers are present in Cyprus, Kashmir, on the Golan Heights and in Lebanon.
32.	In addition to our encouragement of international diplomacy, the United States recognizes its responsibilities to use its own influence for peace. From the days when Theodore Roosevelt mediated the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 we have a long and honorable tradition of mediating or dampening conflicts and promoting peaceful solutions. In Lebanon, we, along with France, Italy and the United Kingdom, have worked for a cease-fire, for the withdrawal of all external forces, and for restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In Chad, we have joined others in supporting the recognized Government, in the face of external aggression. In Central America, as in southern Africa, we are seeking to discourage reliance upon force and to construct a framework for peaceful negotiations. We support a policy to disengage the major Powers from third-world conflict.
33.	The Charter of the United Nations gives an important role to regional organizations in the search for peace. The United States efforts in the cause of peace are only one expression of a spirit that also animates others in the world community. The Organization of American States was a pioneer in regional security efforts. In Central America, the members of the Contadora Group are striving to lay a foundation for peaceful resolution of that region's problems. In East Asia, countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have built a framework for peaceful political and economic co-operation that has greatly strengthened the prospects for lasting peace in their region. In Africa, organizations such as the Economic Community of West African States are being forged to provide practical structures in the struggle to realize Africa's potential.
34.	From the beginning, our hope for the United Nations has been that it would reflect the international community at its best. The United Nations at its best can help us transcend fear and violence and can act as an enormous force for peace and prosperity. Working together, we can combat international lawlessness and promote human dignity.
35.	If the Governments represented in this chamber want peace as genuinely as their peoples do, we shall find it. We can do so by reasserting the moral authority of the United Nations.
36.	In recent weeks, the moral outrage of the world seems to have reawakened. Out of the billions of people who inhabit this planet, why, some might ask, should the death of several hundred shake the world so profoundly? Why should the death of a mother flying toward a reunion with her family or the death of a scholar heading toward new pursuits of knowledge matter so deeply?
Why are nations which lost no citizens in the tragedy so angry?
37.	The reason rests on our assumptions about civilized life and the search for peace. The confidence that allows a mother or a scholar to travel to Asia or Africa or Europe or anywhere else on this planet may be only a small victory in humanity's struggle for peace. Yet what is peace if not the sum of such small victories?
38.	Each stride for peace and every small victory are important for the journey towards a larger and lasting peace. We have made progress. We have avoided another world war. We have seen an end to the traditional colonial era and the birth of 100 newly sovereign nations. Even though development remains a formidable challenge, we have witnessed remarkable economic growth among the industrialized and the developing nations. The United Nations and its affiliates have made important contributions to the quality of life on this planet, such as directly saving countless lives through its refugee and emergency relief programmes. These broad achievements, however, have been overshadowed by the problems that weigh so heavily upon us. The problems are old, but it is not too late to commit ourselves to a new beginning, a beginning fresh with the ideals of the Charter.
39.	Today, at the beginning of this thirty-eighth session, I solemnly pledge my nation to upholding the original ideals of the United Nations. Our goals are those that guide this very body. Our ends are the same as those of the founders of the United Nations, who sought to replace a world at war with one where the rule of law would prevail, where human rights were honored, where development would blossom, where conflict would give way to freedom from violence.
40.	In 1956 President Dwight Eisenhower made an observation on weapons and deterrence in a letter to a publisher. He wrote:
'When we get to the point, as we one day will, that both sides know that in any outbreak of general hostilities, regardless of the element of surprise, destruction will be both reciprocal and complete, possibly we will have sense enough to meet at the conference table with the understanding that the era of armaments has ended and the human race must conform its actions to this truth or die.'
He went on to say,
'. . .we have already come to the point where safety cannot be assumed by arms alone . . . their usefulness becomes concentrated more and more in their characteristics as deterrents than in instruments with which to obtain victory . . .'.
41.	As we persevere in the search for a more secure world we must do everything we can to let diplomacy triumph. Diplomacy, the most honorable of professions, can bring the most blessed of gifts, the gift of peace. If we succeed, the world will find an excitement and accomplishment in peace beyond that which could ever be imagined through violence and war.
I want to leave you today with a message I have often spoken about to the citizens of my own country, especially in times when I have felt they were discouraged and unsure. I say it to you with as much hope and heart as I have said it to my own people. You have the right to dream great dreams. You have the right to seek a better world for your people. A11 of us have the responsibility to work for that better world and, as caring peaceful peoples, think what a powerful force for good we could be. Let us regain the dream the United Nations once dreamed.
﻿ May I join my colleagues in congratulating the President on his election to the high office he now holds. He is even newer to his job than I am to mine. But with his long experience in this Assembly we are confident that he will be able fully to fulfil the heavy responsibilities he has assumed.
74.	Although I am a newcomer to this Assembly, I have been one of its close observers for many years. I have always been an unswerving supporter of the United Nations, of the ideals expressed in its Charter, and of the constructive role it has played in the development of the international community.
75.	There are many successes of which all of us, as Members of the United Nations, may be justly proud. The timely intervention of United Nations peacekeeping forces has so often brought quiet to a troubled area. Through resolutions and the great conferences of the 1970s, we have identified crucial problems and devised plans of concerted action for solving them.
76.	As a specific example, the complex, painstaking negotiations on the law of the sea have now reached the point at which, with one last effort of mutual will, we shall have an agreement of extraordinary significance to us all. 
77.	Yes, the record of the United Nations has proved how useful—indeed, how essential—it is in world affairs. In the recent past, however, I have become increasingly concerned by the path this body has taken. I see it as my responsibility—speaking for Canada as I do now for the first time in this chamber—to tell you frankly what it is that troubles Canadians about recent developments in the conduct of international affairs.
78.	The United Nations today is in serious jeopardy of becoming irrelevant to the peoples of the world. Somehow, in dealing with the many difficult issues that have come before this forum over the years, we have lost sight of the very purpose of this Organization. We have lost our grasp of the human needs that the United Nations was established to help fill, and of the human rights that it is meant to protect.
79.	Too often, the purpose and content of debate is devoted to the interests and aspirations of Governments and politicians, not of the peoples they represent. Too often the energies and skills of delegations are devoted to the goal of political advantage, not to bettering the human condition.
80.	As politicians, we know how important it is to choose carefully the means and even the words we use to promote the goals that we want to promote. But we also know that in so doing we must never lose sight of the true best interests of the people we represent. Once we lose sight of this, we are no longer doing our duty.
81.	It is in this light that I look at what has been happening recently in this and certain other international organizations. As I look, I become very worried. The preamble to the Charter of the United Nations begins, as I am sure you all remember, 'We the peoples of the United Nations...'. This is an organization of people, not of Governments. Yet, what are the tendencies here? We establish a system of procedure and protocol that begins to rival that of Byzantium. We develop a specialized terminology in which ordinary words are invested with arcane significance. Whole paragraphs of ideological meaning are read into the choice of a single ordinary noun or adjective. We form ourselves into international blocs and support propositions or positions that are in violation of our own declared national policies. How, then, can we be seen to foster the well-being of our peoples? Too faintly, too faintly.
82.	Over the years, I have travelled widely across the globe and just since this past June I have had an opportunity to talk with people in 10 different countries. The people to whom I have spoken have strengthened my conviction of the vast reservoir of international goodwill that exists in the hearts of individual citizens around the world. Why, then, is so much of the energy of this Organization devoted to acrimonious wrangling among representatives of Governments? What relevance have the debates in this chamber to the ideals, the hopes and the needs of those for whom this Organization was created: the peoples of the United Nations?
83.	Too often the answer to this question is 'little'. We have allowed ourselves to be captured by the self- imposed dictates of this forum. We have lost sight of why we are here. The people of Canada and, I suspect, the people of countries all over the world are recognizing what is happening here. We do not operate in a closed sphere. Modern communications, and an increasingly informed and interested population ensure that what we do is known and understood across the globe. Our credibility is in jeopardy, and with it the very existence of this Organization. For without popular support, we shall be unable to continue. Unless we make our work, our talks, our very motives more relevant to the concerns of the people we represent, we shall lose the support that we need to continue.
84.	As I see it, the major challenge facing the United Nations in the next decade is to make itself once again a vehicle for filling the needs and rights of the people of the world. We look to the President to help us begin that task.
85.	Thirty-one years ago, when the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it took a step of great importance to people everywhere. Similarly, the two International Covenants, one on Civil and Political Rights and the other on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the General Assembly in 1966, reflected the heartfelt aspirations of the population of this planet. These documents summarize what this great Organization is all about: the fostering and protection of rights.
86.	There are three broad areas of human rights that I want to speak about today. The first is the sort of thing that immediately springs to mind when the term 'human rights' is used. These are the political rights, such as those of freedom of speech and of association, the right to equal treatment before equitable law, the absence of racial, religious or sexual discrimination. The second area is the right to physical safety, the right to peace, the freedom from war. And finally, I want to speak about the rights arising from our natures as human animals, our needs for food, shelter and an appropriate share of the world's riches.
87.	One need not look far to find a dismaying number of examples of violations of political rights, all too often committed by a Government against its own people. Indo-China alone provides too many examples. The uprooting, dislocation and often elimination of so many victims in Kampuchea, the desperate plight of the Laotian refugees, the deliberate expulsion of the Vietnamese boat people, all are too well known. The vicious pillage and massacres of the Amin regime in Uganda and its tragic aftermath, the thousands of women and children in refugee camps—one of which I visited last month in southern Africa—are matched elsewhere by the execution without trial of ousted politicians. There is also the sudden disappearance or exile for political reasons of ordinary men, women and children in other countries.
88.	These crimes against humanity are common knowledge. The people of the world know what is happening around them. But too often, the international community has been reluctant—or culpably slow—to take steps to condemn and rectify these violations of human rights. Too often, the political convenience of Governments has caused them to remain silent when ordinary people cry out for action. Public opinion today is calling us to account for this lethargy, this disregard for human suffering, this irresponsibility.
89.	And yet, there is cause for hope. By no means have all violations of human rights passed unnoticed by the international community. The Meeting on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia, held in Geneva in July and convened and skilfully conducted by the Secretary-General, resulted not only in a substantial humanitarian response, in offers of resettlement places and financial aid for refugees, but also elicited a political response by the Government of Viet Nam, which has since been controlling the outflow of refugees. It is still to be determined whether or not the root-cause has been settled, and the whole international community will have to watch developments carefully. Pressure on the Government of Viet Nam must be sustained, but substantial progress has indeed been made.
90.	Other investigations hold promise of progress. We are pleased to note the investigation now under way by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights into the situation in Argentina. We also welcome the investigation by respected African jurists into the recent tragic events in the Central African Empire. In addition, the Heads of Government of Commonwealth countries, at their meeting at Lusaka this summer, agreed to consider the setting up of a human rights commission within the Commonwealth. There has been modest progress within the United Nations Commission on Human Rights itself. I refer to the appointment of a special rapporteur to investigate the situation in Equatorial Guinea, and the Commission's contacts with certain Governments as a result of its in camera hearings. All this is gratifying progress indeed. But much more is yet to be done.
91.	The United Nations must find better, more certain ways to deal with gross violations of human rights, no matter where they happen. We must be able to take effective action immediately, not years after the abuses begin. That is why Canada has long supported the proposal to establish the office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. This proposal, which could effectively set in place an international human rights ombudsman, has been explored over the years, but as yet not enough Member States have found the courage to proceed with such an office.
92.	Let me propose an alternative, then. The General Assembly at this session should agree to establish a position of Under-Secretary-General for Human Rights, and we should appoint an individual of undisputed stature in the international community to that office. This person would exercise the mandate the Secretary-General has under the Charter to use his good offices in the field of human rights. With this, we could have an instrument through which the United Nations could fulfil this fundamental responsibility given to it by the people of the world.
93.	Another step that could easily be taken is to devise a way of ending the distressingly large number of disappearances of individuals in many parts of the world. We urge that the Commission on Human Rights be instructed to set up a committee of experts to investigate these unexplained vanishings,
94.	But we must not take the progress that has been made as an indication that our job is done. Outrages still exist. Some are long-standing, like apartheid and the situations in Namibia and Zimbabwe-Rhodesia. Others, such as political execution, arise from time to time in various parts of the world. We must find new ways of combating these violations, for world opinion demands it. Unless we can respond, our credibility, our relevance, our usefulness, our very existences are in peril. But our response must be both responsible and timely. The progress being made at this very moment in regard to Namibia and Zimbabwe-Rhodesia, for example, deserves our encouragement and support. It would be irresponsible to pre-empt the satisfactory resolution ' of these problems by precipitous and distracting debate in this or any other forum that some Member States might be inclined to use.
95.	A corner-stone of the United Nations is the second type of human right I want to discuss—the right of the people of the world to physical security. Bora from the ashes of the Second World War, this Organization is devoted to the peaceful resolution of differences be-tween nations. To many people this is the sole reason for the existence of this Organization: to ensure the human right to live in peace.
96.	Here, too, our record gives little cause for satisfaction. Instances of aggression of one country against another continue. As always, righteous justification is claimed by each party to the conflict. There may be righteous warriors, but there are no good wars. The people have entrusted to us the task of stopping this systematic destruction of the most fundamental of all human rights—the right to life itself. And yet armed conflict remains a sorry characteristic of international affairs.
97.	Other related threats to our physical safety continue. The arms race, with all its costs and inherent dangers, bounds on apace. The spread of nuclear technology, with all the benefits it can bring, has not been paralleled by an equal commitment to a renunciation of the development of nuclear explosive capability. We know that even today certain States are working to achieve mastery in this field, not for the increased well- being its energy can bring to the people, but for the creation of an explosion—one that will quake the hearts of peace-loving people everywhere. Surely they can expect better of us.
98.	Fortunately, here, too, there are reasons for hope. The first special session of this Assembly ever devoted to disarmament, that is, the Assembly's tenth special session, was a success. For those who believe, as I do that modern weapons are as much a threat as a protection to the security of nations, this was an encouraging step. Yet the record since that time is disappointing. The new machinery of negotiation in Geneva is blocked by rivalry and suspicion. The testing of nuclear weapons continues, despite the high priority that the special session gave to the ban. Preparations for nuclear and chemical warfare continue; no agreement has been reached on measures to limit the use of weapons that cause unnecessary suffering; and spending for military purposes grows ever larger.
99.	Nevertheless, a hopeful sign of urgency remains. I cite the communique signed in Vienna last June by Presidents Carter and Brezhnev, in which they commit their Governments 'to take major steps to limit nuclear weapons with the objective of ultimately eliminating them, and to complete successfully other arms limitation and disarmament negotiations'
100.	Canada has a particular interest in the honouring of this commitment—we are the only country that is a neighbour to both the United States of America and the Soviet Union. As such we could not escape the devastation of a strategic nuclear war. Hence, our specific concern.
101.	But there is another reason for our deep interest. Canada has been a pioneer in the development of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Our Candu power reactor is an outstanding success both in Canada and abroad. But we are determined that this technology should not be misused. We demand that stringent safeguards be applied by countries buying Canadian nuclear power facilities or materials. We are looking forward to the conclusions of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, the international study examining the further means by which non-proliferation standards can be applied to the nuclear fuel cycle. We want to ensure that the continued recourse to nuclear power is undertaken in the most stringent conditions possible, guaranteeing, as far as is humanly possible, against any non-peaceful use.
102.	We believe that Governments who accept these conditions, indeed all Governments, have a right to expect that the obligations of nuclear States under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will be carried out- including the pursuit of 'negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date', in the words of its article VI. Yet agreement has eluded the negotiations on a comprehensive test ban for 15 years. Time is running out—and the patience of the people is running thin.
103.	Genuine international security is not merely a matter of agreements on arms control and disarmament. Before such agreements can be reached, and certainly before they can have effect, there must be a climate of trust, of decency and justice among the nations of the world. Confidence must be built up by small steps between neighbours, between alliances, and between the nuclear Powers. The United Nations must be allowed to expand its fact-finding and peace-seeking roles if such confidence is to grow. In areas where tensions are too high, concrete steps must be taken to prevent accidents or miscalculations. The people of the world expect no less of us. And the people are right.
104.	Finally, as we examine the lessons of the past, and as we assess the challenges of the future, there is one striking fact that dominates all others—the singular failure of the international community to solve the problem of poverty. We are still haunted by the spectre of hundreds of millions of people living below the poverty line and in danger of starvation. The right to enough material goods to ensure health and dignity is still denied to far too many.
105.	Giving effect to this basic human right is the greatest task facing the United Nations for the remainder of this century. The overriding importance of this work is clear to all. Two years ago this Assembly passed resolution 32/130, which, in paragraph l(i), recognizes that 'the full realization of civil and political rights without the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights is impossible.' It is insufficient for an individual to enjoy full human rights before the law if he or she does not have the basic necessities of life: enough food, health care; education; shelter. Problems of want must be attacked directly and urgently in the 1980s.
106.	I welcome the renewed attention being given by the United Nations family to these problems, for here, too, I see reason for hope. There is growing recognition that development assistance does not imply the foisting of one country's social and economic philosophy on another. The true meaning of co-operation is increasingly understood.
107.	It is no answer to the problem to set up a sort of international social welfare system to give hand-outs to the poorest. Nothing could be more demeaning to human dignity, nor more guaranteed to perpetuate poverty. Our goal must be to enable people to use their own abilities, and to assist States to develop their own potential.
108.	These may sound grand words, optimistic words, easy to say. But, frankly, I am optimistic about the capacity of our international community to work together to solve the problems before it. That these problems are huge, numerous and complicated, there is no denial.
109.	What I find worrying is not the fact that we have problems, but the manner in which we approach them. I place enormous personal importance on the North- South dialogue. And yet I fear that our present approach is doomed to failure. Many of the problems with which we are grappling in this dialogue are, after all, the result of change—rapid change, dramatic change and, if we are honest with ourselves, change that is often for the better. The last three decades—including the turbulent 1970s—have been ones of unprecedented economic growth for the developing world, at rates faster than those of the industrialized countries. The problem is that this growth has been uneven and, in the minds of those whose expectations have been raised so high, not fast enough. As we look into the decade before us, it is the countries at the bottom end of the economic scale that face the bleakest future and the lowest growth. At the opposite end of the scale, in the wealthy industrial countries, the prospects for the 1980s are, for a variety of reasons, also for a relatively slow pace of economic growth. Between these extremes, however, lie countries whose growth has been much more rapid, and who, in spite of immense problems, are likely to maintain a faster pace in the future.
110.	This is a very brief outline of what has been happening in the past and what is likely to occur in the years ahead. And yet the international discussions of such matters do not take account of these realities. Of particular concern to me is the increasing note of pessimism that seems to be creeping into the North-South dialogue; the contention that nothing has changed for the better anywhere and is unlikely to in the future; the spirit of confrontation between North and South with verbal barrages across an artificial frontier; the allocation of blame for misfortune, not the search for self- improvement.
111.	If there is one message I should like to leave clearly with my colleagues, whether they be of the North or the South, it is that such approaches to our problems and such tactics are likely to be counterproductive. I can tell the Assembly that in Canada they do more harm than good. In Canada we have spent a lot of time and effort and money in developing programmes of economic co-operation, and always with the support of the Canadian people. No democratic Government can act without such popular support. I am confident that this support remains and that we can continue to improve our programmes and adapt our policies to the changing international environment. At present, however, we face important domestic problems within Canada. One of them, the energy issue, we share with many nations. I assure members that we are determined to become part of the solution and not part of that problem. But the efforts that our people will be called upon to make to help solve this world-wide problem will be great. As a result, now more than ever we need to demonstrate that our overseas programmes are useful and efficient and actually do contribute to the welfare of people who need assistance. If we hear through the North-South dialogue that after 30 years of effort nothing has changed for the better, that doom and gloom lie in the future, and that our lack of political will is entirely to blame, I am afraid that the reaction of the Canadian people will be to demand that we spend our efforts and money at home. By all means let us define our problems closely, but let us develop realistic responses. By all means let us be frank with each other, but let us maintain a constructive courtesy. Talk, certainly, but act, too. Let us indulge in technical analysis, but let us never forget that it is the individual we are trying to help.
112.	Immense tasks lie before us as we grapple with all the issues now on the negotiating table within the United Nations system. The desperate plight of the people of Kampuchea, for example, cries for immediate international attention. Our ability to act effectively in this regard will be a measure of the sincerity of our commitment to the ideals we all have endorsed. My confidence in our ability to find solutions is based in part on the growing recognition in all countries that interdependence is a fact and not a slogan, and in part on the knowledge that we must all work together if we are
113.	This, then, is a partial agenda for the 1980s. The work must begin now, during the President's term of office. Although public confidence in this great international institution is at a sufficiently low level to jeopardize its future, the opportunities to regain that confidence have never been better.
114.	With the President's help, we can galvanize this Assembly into a genuine forum for the betterment of the peoples of the world. We can turn away from confrontation between Governments to co-operation among people. When this session is seen to address the rights of human beings rather than the ambitions of politicians, then we shall have the support of people everywhere, and we can use the world's vast resources of riches, energies and intelligence to meet the challenges ahead.
115.	May the President lead us in that direction, I can assure him that the Canadian people will follow.
﻿We meet in this General Assembly on the threshold of a new decade. It will be a time of complex challenge, a period in which, more than ever, co-operative endeavours among nations are a matter not only of idealism but also of direct self-interest.
39.	The decade now drawing to a close has been characterized by rapid, far-reaching and fundamental change. Awesome technological developments are all about us. The assertion of national independence has reshaped the political geography of our planet. Within nations we see an accelerating rise in individual economic, political and social expectations. The unrelenting hostility of the cold war has given way to a more complex relationship between East and West, with elements of both competition and co-operation. The simple notion of a bipolar world has become obsolete. Increasingly there is a profusion of different systems and allegiances and a diffusion of political and military power. The world economic order is also undergoing inexorable transformations. Many nations formerly among the disadvantaged are now achieving global economic power. Economic interdependence has become a daily reality for the citizens of every nation.
40.	These sweeping changes have for the most part worked in constructive directions, changing lives for the better and opening new possibilities for collective effort and creative diplomacy.
41.	But while these developments demonstrate that progress is possible, they by no means demonstrate that it is inevitable. I say this for two reasons.
42.	First, in a number of areas the pace of current progress is dwarfed by the scope of coming challenges. The next decade will decide whether we have the collective wisdom and the common will to surmount a series of imposing and interrelated problems which must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner.
43.	The need to develop new forms of energy will pose a continuing challenge. We have entered the difficult transition from a petroleum economy to one based on other forms of energy.
44.	Even without this added burden, we face an imposing task in providing for the basic needs of people and in narrowing the combustible disparity between wealth and despair. The food shortage facing developing countries, for example, was 12 million tons in 1975. It could be 70 to 85 million tons by 1990, unless productivity rises sharply.
45.	We must strike a decent balance between the burgeoning demands of more people for a better life and the inescapable reality of a fragile environment.
46.	Such prospects carry the seeds of future discord. As these seeds ripen, and the growth and spread of weapons continue, regional conflicts become all the more dangerous in their toll of lives and resources and in the heightened risk of wider confrontation.
47.	And despite our emergence from the days of unrelenting hostility, the East-West relationship can deteriorate dangerously whenever one side fails to respect the security interests of the other.
48.	Our ability to meet these tests depends on a second issue: will we confront such challenges together, and benefit together? Or will we let adversity divide us, and thus conquer?
49.	I must be frank and say that I am not sure what the answer will be.
50.	There are some reasons for encouragement. In recent years the nations here represented have found it easier, in many different forums, to talk with each other rather than at each other. East and West have entered into the broadest arms control agenda in history. The Soviet Union and the United States have negotiated significant limitations on strategic arms in a treaty that now awaits ratification. North and South have made progress on financial, trade and commodity issues—far more progress than has been acknowledged. Agreement has been reached on a sharp increase in the resources of IMF. Lending by the multilateral development banks has increased. Expanded trade opportunities have been opened by the recently concluded trade negotiations. We have moved ahead on other matters, such as international debt and a common fund for commodities. We should recognize such progress and build on it. We have taken steps as well towards the resolution of some deeply embedded regional disputes.
51.	But I am concerned that there are also factors at work which could reverse this co-operative trend. The severity of the problems we face could drive nations to the pursuit of their own separate advantage at the expense of international co-operation. In times of economic trouble, even relatively prosperous countries find it more difficult to look beyond their internal concerns to meet international needs. Indeed, it is a vivid lesson of history that hardship can breed short-sighted insularity. It can arouse instincts for self-preservation at the expense of others. In such times, the voices of economic nationalism will be raised in all our countries. We must resist them. We must resist, as well, the voices of international confrontation. In a number of international negotiations, political as well as economic, we have worked our way through to the toughest issues involved. We must not react now in frustration, and unleash a spiral of rhetoric which could deepen rather than resolve our divisions.
52.	The challenges of the 1980s can be met—if each of us here represented meets the responsibilities which we share.
53.	Our first responsibility is to persist in the search for peace, to reduce both the danger and the destructiveness of war. The future of two regions—the Middle East and southern Africa—depends on specific decisions that will be made in the coming months.
54.	We believe that the 26 March Treaty between Egypt and Israel has reduced the dangers inherent in the Arab-Israeli conflict and has laid the foundation for a settlement that can be both durable and just.
55.	But the dramatic achievement of peace between Israel and Egypt and the successful implementation of the first phases of the Treaty of peace have not obscured the necessity of moving toward peace between Israel and its other neighbours. Indeed it remains the resolute view of my Government that further progress towards an over-all peace is essential.
56.	We know that an ultimate settlement must address the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects.
57.	As the peace process continues to unfold, it is our deepest desire that representatives of the Palestinian people and the Governments of Jordan and Syria should join in this great quest. 
58.	This is consistent with—indeed it underscores— our unshakable commitment to Israel's security and well-being, now and in the future.
59.	None of the parties involved in this difficult negotiation has any illusions that resolving the Palestinian issue will be easy. But the United States is convinced that progress will be made towards that goal.
60.	Preserving the integrity of Lebanon is also critical to peace in the Middle East. There has been a cease-fire in southern Lebanon, the fragility of which is underscored by the events of today. We need not only a temporary cease-fire, but a broader truce. We will be working towards such a goal in our discussions with other interested Governments here at this Assembly. Lebanon has suffered all too much.
61.	The desire for peace is shared by all the peoples of the Middle East. We recognize that there are disagreements about how best to reach that common goal. We believe the course on which we are embarked is the right one, indeed the only one that has shown practical results. We call on all who genuinely seek peace to join in this endeavour.
62.	A step towards peace has been taken as well on the Rhodesian conflict. The parties are now engaged in negotiation towards a solution that could combine true majority rule with essential minority rights. The United Kingdom Government, the Commonwealth nations, and the parties themselves deserve great credit for this new step. The deepening agony of war could be ended by agreement on a fair constitution and new elections, as called for in the final communique issued by the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August
63.	We have made substantial progress in Namibia. But obstacles remain. The contact group is working with the parties concerned to find ways to resolve the few outstanding issues. We do not underestimate the difficulties, but neither should any of us underestimate the opportunities that a settlement would bring for all of southern Africa.
64.	In most negotiations, we can best make progress by stages. A knot can never be untied from the inside. We must begin with the parts that we can grasp, and work our way through to the end of the problem.
65.	History will judge us severely if we let our opportunities for peace slip away. As negotiations proceed, the issues we address become progressively more difficult. But we must not let future fears or ambitions undermine the progress that has been made.
66.	As we work on these and other conflicts; let us also squarely face the fact that our planet is plagued by those who make war on innocents, as we saw just weeks ago in the tragic death of Lord Mountbatten. We must have greater international co-operation to combat the barbarous practices of the terrorist. The United States strongly supports the basic elements of the draft convention against the taking of hostages, the conclusion of this treaty will contribute to a growing consensus that terrorism will not be tolerated, regardless of the political cause its perpetrators claim to pursue.
67.	Finally, the requirement of peace carries with it an international responsibility to limit the spread and accumulation of arms. A particular obligation falls to the largest nuclear Powers—the United States and the Soviet Union—to contain the competition in strategic weapons. The treaty concluded after the second round of SALT can be a major step towards the fulfilment of that obligation.
68.	The goal of strategic stability will be further served if the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States are able to agree on a comprehensive ban, on nuclear tests. As the nuclear super-Powers seek the path towards mutual restraint, all nations must also recognize the direct threat to their security from the spread of nuclear weapons. Developments in recent years can bring new impetus to the non-proliferation effort—including progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation—which can help us to find safer ways to develop nuclear energy for humanity; the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards; the substantial increase in the number of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the entry into force of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which now finally appears within grasp; and the pledge by a number of nuclear Powers, under specific circumstances, to refrain from the use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.
69.	But there have also been serious setbacks- further demonstrations of intent to acquire nuclear weapons, in disregard of the inherent dangers for regional and international security. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held next year, will be a critical time for taking stock—and for redoubling our efforts to make progress on this urgent international priority.
70.	Beyond the search for peace, a second responsibility that we share is to be sensitive to the international consequences of our national economic decisions, and to resist the temptation to solve our economic problems at the expense of others.
71.	The imprudence of economic nationalism has been harshly demonstrated in the past. The world depression a half-century ago was spread, deepened and prolonged by a wave of protectionism. That memory has spurred us towards a new multilateral trade agreement intended to open markets and keep them open, even in a time of economic strain.
72.	Today, let me address one of those issues which most clearly reflects the direct connection between national decisions and global consequences. That issue is energy. In almost no area is the need for common action more apparent or more urgent. It is an issue which now threatens to divide us, economically and politically. In a future of greater scarcity, these divisions could weaken the fabric of international comity which this organisation embodies.
73.	All nations will suffer if all nations do not act responsibly in their consumption, of energy, in its pricing and in its production. Despite a difficult prognosis for our energy future, I believe the basis may exist for progress. 
74.	Until the 1970s modern industrial economies operated on two basic assumptions, which also governed relations between oil importers and exporters. These two assumptions were that oil is cheap, and that supplies are unlimited. Now all nations realize that these assumptions no longer hold.
75.	The commitments made by the major industrial countries at the Tokyo Economic Summit demonstrate this clearly. My Government is taking ambitious action to address the energy problem and is making efforts to exceed these commitments. President Carter has committed the United States not to import more than 8.2 million barrels of oil a day in 1979, and never to exceed the peak level of our imports reached in 1977. Total United States energy research and development this year is $3.2 billion. We are investing $528 million this year—and $600 million next year—in the development and use of solar energy. We are significantly expanding our development of synthetic fuels, to take advantage of the abundant coal and oil shale in our country.
76.	Much of this new energy technology will have application in other countries as well. We will seek to make it available to others under mutually satisfactory conditions. For we recognize that by helping others resolve their energy problems, we help resolve our own.
77.	Let me indicate some of the ways in which we are prepared to work with others to meet our common energy needs.
78.	We have joined other industrial nations in agreeing to establish a provisional international technology group which will recommend ways to broaden international participation in the commercial development of alternative fuels.
79.	I pledged last year that the United States would do more to mobilize its technical talents on behalf of the development of others. I am pleased to report that next month we will establish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation. This Institute will work for the goals set by the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development. It will help the people of developing nations to benefit from our technologies. The Institute's Policy Council will include experts from developing nations. Energy development will be among its highest priorities.
80.	We will participate actively in preparations for the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy.
81.	At the recent Tokyo Economic Summit, the World Bank was invited to take the lead in coordinating our assistance to developing nations in the field of energy. We suggest that the World Bank bring together a group of experts to review the question of energy research, development and training in detail. Specifically, that group could evaluate the work of existing energy research and training centres, both national and international, in developing countries. In addition, it could recommend how current institutions could be strengthened and whether new multilateral ones should be created. We are supporting the expansion of the World Bank's programme for the exploration and development of mineral fuels. The Bank is also considering whether local programmes of development finance are adequate to support the rapid application of solar, small hydroelectric and other renewable energy technologies in developing nations.
82.	The Inter-American Development Bank has proposed creation of a facility to provide political risk insurance and loan guarantees for private investment in energy and minerals projects in its region. This could be an effective means of stimulating energy development there. We are willing to pursue with the Bank its initiative and work with other countries to develop an acceptable proposal.
83.	As the industrial countries make serious efforts to restrict oil demand, and to help the developing countries meet their energy challenges, the question increasingly becomes whether the oil-producing nations are prepared to stabilize prices, and, to the extent it is within their control, ensure adequate supplies. A failure to do so will continue to have harsh consequences for the world economy, especially the poorer nations.
84.	We understand the natural desire of oil-exporting nations to husband this valuable resource for future generations. And we accept the fact that oil prices must reflect not only the strength of demand, but also the long-term scarcity of supply—so long as scarcity is never contrived to manipulate price,
85.	But oil producers must understand that there is a limit to what the economies of the oil-consuming nations, and the global economy, can sustain.
86.	We must all proceed with a responsible recognition that our national energy decisions will have profound global effects—and will return either to haunt or to help their makers.
87.	A third common responsibility is an intensified commitment to help improve the lives of our fellow human beings—to provide the necessities of life, to afford the chance to progress, to assure a voice in decisions which will determine their future.
88.	We have made progress in the field of human rights, but we must do more. In the past year, some nations have taken steps to restore legal protections and democratic institutions. And we have seen the inauguration of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the forceful call of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] for the creation of regional human rights institutions on the continent of Africa, and the activation of UNESCO's human rights procedures. The growing concern for human rights is undeniable. Yet the sad truth is that, even as we sit here today, men and women face torture, death and oppression for daring to exercise rights set forth in the Charter of this body three decades ago. Our joint challenge is to advance the aspirations of all peoples for human dignity.
89.	Our commitment must be to economic as well as political and social rights—for all are indispensable to human dignity. Improvements in economic well-being, opportunities for participation in the political process, and a growing sense of both economic and political equity can do much to defuse the grievances which can lead to national convulsions and international tensions.
90.	To meet this commitment to a better life for all peoples, we must each strive to move the North-South dialogue beyond grand themes and on to specific cases—to priority areas in which practical development goals can be met. Let me discuss in this connexion our efforts towards a goal we should adopt as a matter of simple humanity—that by the end of this century no person on this bountiful earth should have to go hungry.
91.	Last year, I noted that we must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests into losing our sense of urgency. Since then, poor harvests in a number of countries have substantially increased the international demand for food. This situation underscores the need to accumulate adequate stocks to support world food security. I assure Members that the United States will do all it can to prevent a global food crisis. The American harvest this year will be of record size. We have removed all restrictions on wheat production for next year. We have established farmer-owned grain reserves which, through the accumulation and release of stocks, have helped stabilize supplies.
92.	An international wheat agreement still eludes our grasp. We should not abandon this goal. But we should move immediately to complete negotiations for a new food aid convention. The World Food Council has urged an agreement by mid-1980. We support that recommendation. In the meantime, we are already implementing the higher food aid pledge the convention would entail.
93.	At the same time, major emphasis must be placed on improving global food production. Over half of American direct development aid is now devoted to agriculture. We will continue working to improve the yields of major food crops, to preserve croplands and to expand research on ways to increase the production of traditional and new crops, especially those grown by poor farmers.
94.	These efforts have received effective support from the International Agricultural Research Centres. We support proposals to double the resources contributed to those centres and intend to increase our contribution. We hope additional countries will become contributors.
95.	We must be aware; however, that in the long run these efforts could be vitiated if the world's population growth is not slowed. Half the couples of child-bearing age still do not have adequate access to family planning services. We must strive to make family planning services—along with other elements of basic health care, adequate food supplies and clean water— available to all as rapidly as we can.
96.	And in the short run, we must be prepared to meet emergency needs wherever famine afflicts humanity or refugees seek haven—in Africa, in Latin America, in South-East Asia or elsewhere.
97.	The proposal made by Vice-President Mondaleat the Geneva Meeting for a refugee resettlement fund reflects our belief that the international community should deal on a global basis with a global and grave refugee crisis. We urge broad participation in this fund.
98.	Vigorous and large-scale international action is required to bring relief to the starving in Kampuchea, now facing one of the great human tragedies of modern times. Tens of thousands of sick and hungry Khmer are already pressing on Thailand's border. Hundreds of thousands may soon follow them. Even more widespread famine and disease are in prospect, especially in view of recent reports of intensified fighting. To avert unthinkable catastrophe» an international programme of humanitarian relief must be established in Kampuchea as soon as possible. International organizations must be able to bring a co-ordinated, massive and adequately monitored programme of emergency relief to all needy Khmer. We would endorse such an effort.
99.	The food crisis in Kampuchea promises both to multiply the flow of refugees and to take a terrible toil among those who cannot escape. The flood of refugees from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea already has brought great suffering to hundreds of thousands of innocent people, as well as imposed heavy burdens on countries of first asylum.
100.	The international community has begun to respond. But humanitarian steps are not enough. The community of nations must make a more active effort to restore peace to the region and to resolve by non- military means the problems that developments in Indo-China have carried in their wake. They pose a threat to the stability of the region as a whole.
101.	I believe we can meet the challenges before us. But let us not misjudge their magnitude.
102.	Resolution of regional disputes and placing new limits on the instruments of war will require new acts of national and international will. The 1980s could portend a prolonged energy crisis. It could be a decade of widespread famine. Unless the swelling deficits of developing countries can be managed, many of their economies may stagnate and some could be threatened with collapse. Global problems like these require global solutions.
103.	This Assembly will decide whether to launch a new round of negotiations on economic co-operation for development. Let me state today that the United States would participate, in the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, in consultations to decide on the most effective way of conducting such negotiations.
104.	If new global negotiations are to succeed, the participants must be realistic about each other's political and economic capabilities. We must assign priority to those issues on which concrete results are possible, and we should avoid duplicating the work of existing institutions. In this way, the negotiations could help build a global consensus for action.
105.	Many of the issues I have addressed are already prominent on the agenda of the United Nations. The need for co-operation in addressing them requires that we continue to strengthen this institution. Financial, procedural and management reforms are urgently necessary. As a first step, we urge that the Secretary-General's recommendations, now adopted by this Assembly, be fully implemented.
106.	The urgency of the requirements I have described calls for something more on the part of all Members of the United Nations.
107.	The distinctions between North and South, like those between East and West, reflect differing interests. They have a role in defining the issues and in clarifying our choices. But we must commit ourselves to finding areas where our interests converge.
108.	Each of us has our special values to be nurtured, our particular goals to be served, and I do not suggest it can or should be otherwise. The United States believes in a world of diversity.
109.	But let us resolve—here, at this Assembly — to find in our common needs and common humanity a renewed dedication to the search for common ground.
Today, we look ahead to the
new millennium. And at this last General Assembly of the
twentieth century, we look back on a century that taught
us much of what we need to know about the promise of
tomorrow. We have learned a great deal over the last one
hundred years: how to produce enough food for a
growing world population; how human activity affects the
environment; the mysteries of the human gene. An
information revolution now holds the promise of universal
access to knowledge. We have learned that open markets
create more wealth, that open societies are more just. We
have learned how to come together, through the United
Nations and other institutions, to advance common
interests and values.
Yet for all our intellectual and material advances, the
twentieth century has been deeply scarred by enduring
human failures: by greed and lust for power, by
hot-blooded hatreds and stone-cold hearts. At century’s
end, modern developments magnify greatly the dangers of
these timeless flaws. Powerful forces still resist
reasonable efforts to put a human face on the global
economy, to lift the poor, or to heal the earth’s
environment. Primitive claims of racial, ethnic or religious
superiority, when married to advanced weaponry and
2


terrorism, threaten to destroy the greatest potential for
human development in history, even as they make a
wasteland of the soul.
Therefore, we look to the future with hope, but with
unanswered questions. In the new millennium, will nations
be divided by ethnic and religious conflicts? Will the
nation-state itself be imperiled by them, or by terrorism? Or
will we keep coming closer together instead, while enjoying
the normal differences that make life more interesting? In
the new century, how will patriotism be defined — as faith
in a dream worth living, or as fear and loathing of other
people’s dreams? Will we be free of the fear of weapons of
mass destruction, or forced to teach our grandchildren how
to survive a nuclear, chemical or biological attack? Will
globalism bring shared prosperity, or will it make the
desperate of the world even more desperate? Will we use
science and technology to grow the economy and protect
the environment, or put it all at risk in a world dominated
by a struggle over natural resources?
The truth is that the twentieth century’s amazing
progress has not resolved these questions. But it has given
us the tools to make the answers come out right — the
knowledge, the resources, the institutions. Now, we must
use them. If we do, we can make the millennium not just
a changing of the digits, but a true changing of the times —
a gateway to greater peace, prosperity and freedom. With
that in mind, I offer three resolutions for the new
millennium.
First, let us resolve to wage an unrelenting battle
against poverty and for shared prosperity so that no part of
humanity is left behind in the global economy.
Globalization is not inherently divisive. While infant
mortality in developing countries has been cut nearly in half
since 1970, life expectancy has increased by 10 years.
According to the United Nations Human Development
Index, which measures a decent standard of living, a good
education, a long and healthy life, the gap between rich and
poor countries on this measure has actually declined.
Open trade and new technologies have been engines
of this progress; they have helped hundreds of millions to
see their prospects rise by marketing the fruits of their labor
and creativity abroad. With proper investments in education,
developing countries should be able to keep their best and
brightest talent at home and to gain access to global
markets for goods and services and capital.
But this promising future is far from inevitable. We
are still squandering the potential of far too many. As many
as 1.3 billion people still live on less than a dollar a day.
More than half the population of many countries has no
access to safe water. A person in South Asia is 700 times
less likely to use the Internet than someone in the United
States. Forty million people a year still die of hunger,
almost as many as the total number killed in World
War II. We must refuse to accept a future in which one
part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new
economy, while the other lives at the knife edge of
survival.
What must we do? We can start by remembering
that open markets advance the blessings and
breakthroughs we want to spread. That is why we in the
United States have worked to keep our markets open
during the recent global financial crisis, though it has
brought us record trade deficits. It is why we want to
launch a new global trade round when the World Trade
Organization meets in Seattle this fall. It is why we are
working to build a trading system that strengthens the
well-being of workers and consumers, protects the
environment and makes competition a race to the top, not
the bottom. It is why I am proud we have come together
at the International Labour Organization to ban abusive
child labour everywhere in the world.
We do not face a choice between trade and aid, but
instead the challenge to make both work for people who
need them. Aid should focus on what is known to work:
credit for poor people starting businesses, keeping girls in
school, meeting the needs of mothers and children.
Development aid should be used for development, not to
buy influence or finance donors’ exports. It should go
where Governments invest in their people and answer to
their concerns.
We should also come to the aid of countries
struggling to rise but held down by the burden of debt.
The G-7 nations have adopted a plan to reduce by up to
70 per cent the outstanding debt of the world’s poorest
countries, freeing resources for education, health and
growth.
All of us, developed and developing countries alike,
should take action now to halt global climate change.
What has that to do with fighting poverty? A great deal.
The most vulnerable members of the human family will
be hurt first and hurt most if rising temperatures devastate
agriculture, accelerate the spread of disease in tropical
countries and flood island nations.
3


Does this mean developing countries must sacrifice
growth to protect the environment? Absolutely not.
Throughout history, a key to human progress has been
willingness to abandon big ideas that are no longer true.
One big idea that is no longer true is that the only way to
build a modern economy is to use energy as we did in the
industrial age. The challenge and opportunity for
developing countries today is to skip the costs of the
industrial age by using technologies that improve the
economy and the environment at the same time.
Finally, to win the fight against poverty, we must
improve health care for all people. Over the next 10 years
in Africa, AIDS is expected to kill more people and orphan
more children than all the wars of the twentieth century
combined. Each year diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis
and pneumonia leave millions of children without parents
and millions of parents without children. Yet for all these
diseases, vaccine research is advancing too slowly, in part
because the potential customers are too poor. Only 2 per
cent of all global biomedical research is devoted to the
major killers in the developing world.
No country can break poverty’s bonds if its people are
disabled by disease and its Government overwhelmed by
the needs of the ill. With United Nations leadership, we
have come close to eradicating polio, once the scourge of
children everywhere. We are down to 5,000 reported cases
worldwide. I have asked our Congress to fund a major
increase to finish the job, and I ask other nations to follow
suit. We have begun a comprehensive battle against the
global AIDS epidemic. This year I am seeking another
$100 million for prevention, counselling and care in Africa.
I want to do more to get to those who need them most new
drugs that prevent transmission from mothers to newborns.
And today I commit the United States to a concerted effort
to accelerate the development and delivery of vaccines for
malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS and other diseases that
disproportionately affect the developing world. Many
approaches have been proposed, from tax credits to special
funds for the purchase of these vaccines.
To tackle these issues, I will ask public-health experts,
the chief executive officers of our pharmaceutical
companies, foundation representatives and members of
Congress to join me at a special White House meeting and
to strengthen incentives for research and development,
working with, not against, the private sector to meet our
common goal.
The second resolution I hope we will make today is to
strengthen the capacity of the international community to
prevent and whenever possible to stop outbreaks of mass
killing and displacement. This requires, as we all know,
shared responsibility, like the one West African nations
accepted when they acted to restore peace in Sierra
Leone; the one 19 democracies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) embraced to stop ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia and in Kosovo; the one that Asian
and Pacific nations have now assumed in East Timor,
with the strong support of the entire United Nations,
including the United States.
Secretary-General Annan spoke for all of us during
the Kosovo conflict, and more recently in regard to East
Timor, when he said that ethnic cleansers and mass
murderers can find no refuge in the United Nations, no
source of comfort or justification in its Charter. We must
do more to make these words real. Of course, we must
approach this challenge with some considerable degree of
humility. It is easy to say “never again”, but much harder
to make it so. Promising too much can be as cruel as
caring too little.
But difficulties, dangers and costs are not an
argument for doing nothing. When we are faced with
deliberate, organized campaigns to murder whole peoples
or expel them from their land, the care of victims is
important but not enough. We should work to end the
violence. Our response in every case cannot and should
not be the same. Sometimes collective military force is
both appropriate and feasible. Sometimes concerted
economic and political pressure combined with diplomacy
is a better answer, as it was in making possible the
introduction of forces to East Timor. Of course, the way
the international community responds will depend on the
capacity of countries to act and on their perception of
their national interests. NATO acted in Kosovo, for
example, to stop a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing
in a place where we had important interests at stake and
the ability to act collectively.
The same considerations brought Nigerian troops and
their partners to Sierra Leone and Australians and others
to East Timor. That is proper — so long as we work
together, support each other and do not abdicate our
collective responsibility. I know that some are troubled
that the United States and others cannot respond to every
humanitarian catastrophe in the world. We cannot do
everything, everywhere. But simply because we have
different interests in different parts of the world does not
mean we can be indifferent to the destruction of innocents
in any part of the world. That is why we have supported
the efforts of Africans to resolve the deadly conflicts that
4


have raged through parts of their continent. It is why we
are working with friends in Africa to build the African
Crisis Response Initiative, which has trained more than
4,000 peacekeepers from six countries. It is why we are
helping establish an international coalition against genocide
to bring nations together to stop the flow of money and
arms to those who commit crimes against humanity.
There is also a critical need for countries emerging
from conflict to build police institutions accountable to
people and the law, often with the help of civilian police
from other nations. We need international forces with the
training to fill the gap between local police and military
peacekeepers, as French, Argentine, Italian and other
military police have done in Haiti and Bosnia. We will
work with our partners and the United Nations to continue
to ensure that such forces can deploy when they are needed.
What is the role of the United Nations of in preventing
mass slaughter and dislocation? Very large. Even in
Kosovo, NATO’s actions followed a clear consensus,
expressed in several Security Council resolutions, that the
atrocities committed by Serb forces were unacceptable and
that the international community had a compelling interest
in seeing them end. Had we chosen to do nothing in the
face of this brutality, I do not believe we would have
strengthened the United Nations. Instead we would have
risked discrediting everything it stands for.
By acting as we did, we helped to vindicate the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter to
give the United Nations the opportunity it now has to play
the central role in shaping Kosovo’s future. In the real
world, principles often collide and tough choices must be
made. The outcome in Kosovo is hopeful.
Finally, as we enter this new era, let our third
resolution be to protect our children against the possibility
that nuclear, chemical and biological weapons will ever be
used again. The last millennium has seen constant advances
in the destructive power of weaponry. In the coming
millennium, this trend can continue or, if we choose, we
can reverse it with global standards universally respected.
We have made more progress than many realize. After
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Ukraine courageously chose to give up their nuclear
weapons. America and Russia have moved forward with
substantial arms reductions. President Yeltsin and I agreed
in June, even as we await Russian ratification of START II,
to begin talks on a START III treaty that will cut our cold-
war arsenals by 80 per cent from their height. Brazil has
joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), capping a process that has almost totally
eliminated the threat of nuclear proliferation in Latin
America. We have banned chemical weapons from the
Earth, though we must implement that commitment fully
and gain universal coverage. One hundred and fifty-two
nations have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and, while India and Pakistan did test nuclear
weapons last year, the international reaction proved that
the global consensus against proliferation is very strong.
We need to bolster the standards to reinforce that
consensus. We must reaffirm our commitment to the
NPT, strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention and
make fast progress on a treaty to ban production of fissile
materials. To keep existing stocks from the wrong hands,
we should strengthen the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials. And today, again I ask
our Congress to approve the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.
We must stop the spread of nuclear weapons,
materials and expertise at the source. Since 1992, we have
worked with Russia and the other nations of the former
Soviet Union to do that. We are expanding that effort
because challenges remain, but thus far we can say that
the nightmare scenario of deadly weapons flowing
unchecked across borders and of scientists selling their
services en masse to the highest bidder has been avoided.
Now, we must work to deny weapons of mass
destruction to those who would use them. For almost a
decade, nations have stood together to keep the Iraqi
regime from threatening its people and the world with
such weapons. Despite all the obstacles Saddam Hussein
has placed in our path, we must continue to ease the
suffering of the people of Iraq. At the same time, we
cannot allow the Government of Iraq to flout 40 — and
I say 40 — successive United Nations Security Council
resolutions and to rebuild his arsenal.
Just as important is the challenge of keeping deadly
weapons away from terrorist groups. They may have
weaker capabilities than States, but they have fewer
compunctions about using such weapons. The possibility
that terrorists will threaten us with weapons of mass
destruction can be met with neither panic nor
complacency. It requires serious, deliberate, disciplined
concern and effective cooperation from all of us.
There are many other challenges. Today I have
spoken about just three: the need to do something about
5


the world’s poor and to put a human face on the global
economy; the need to do more to prevent killing and
dislocation of innocents; the need to do more to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will never be used on our
children. I believe they are the most important. In meeting
them, the United Nations is indispensable.
It is precisely because we are committed to the United
Nations that we have worked hard to support the effective
management of this body. But the United States also has a
responsibility to equip the United Nations with the
resources it needs to be effective. As I think most Members
know, I have strongly supported the United States meeting
all its financial obligations to the United Nations and I will
continue to do so. We will do our very best to succeed this
year.
When the cold war ended, the United States could
have chosen to turn away from the opportunities and
dangers of the world. Instead, we have tried to be engaged,
involved and active. We know this moment of unique
prosperity and power for the United States is a source of
concern to many. I can only answer by saying this: In the
seven years that I have been privileged to come here to
speak to this body, America has tried to be a force for
peace. We believe we are better off when nations resolve
their differences by force of argument rather than force of
arms. We have sought to help former adversaries like
Russia and China become prosperous, stable members of
the world community because we feel far more threatened
by the potential weakness of the world’s leading nations
than by their strength. Instead of imposing our values on
others, we have sought to promote a system of
government — democracy — that empowers people to
choose their own destinies according to their own values
and aspirations. We have sought to keep our markets open
because we believe a strong world economy benefits our
own workers and businesses, as well as the people of the
world who are selling to us. I hope that we have been and
will continue to be good partners with the rest in the new
millennium.
Not long ago, I went to a refugee camp in Macedonia.
The people I met there, children and adults alike, had
suffered horrible, horrible abuses, but they had never given
up hope because they believed that there is an international
community that stands for their dignity and their freedom.
I want to make sure that, 20 or 50 or 100 years from now,
people everywhere will still believe that about our United
Nations. So let us resolve, in the bright dawn of the new
millennium, to bring in an era in which our desire to create
will overwhelm our capacity to destroy. If we do that, then,
through the United Nations and far-sighted leaders,
humanity finally can live up to its name.








Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the
General Assembly. Canadians are proud to have
accompanied you and your people on their journey to join
the community of nations.
On behalf of Canada, allow me also to welcome the
Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru and the
Kingdom of Tonga as new Members of the United Nations.

Mr. President, your election is a tribute to your
wisdom and your dedication to the goals of the United
Nations. I am convinced that you will guide us well in
carrying out the work that we are gathered here to do on
behalf of all of the world's people.

Indeed, it is we the people for whom the United
Nations was founded and its purposes forged. We the
people, not we the nation States, or the ministers, or the
ambassadors, or the Secretariat. Let us recall these lines
from the United Nations Charter:
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, ... to reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights, ... to establish conditions under which
justice ... can be maintained, and to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
... have resolved to combine our efforts to accomplish
these aims”.
These are noble words and compelling goals. But do
they still ring true, or is there a need for new meaning and
new commitment?
How would we the people assess the handiwork of the
United Nations to date and judge the world scene today
when we have seen in the last year alone the brutal ethnic
cleansing of Kosovo, the slaughter and maiming of
innocents in Sierra Leone, Angola, both Congos and Sudan
and the cruel suppression of the independence agreement in
East Timor? Or when we see kidnapping and terrorism
plaguing virtually every region, the growing, powerful
influence of the drug-traffickers and criminals, the return of
the slave merchants and the emergence of modern warlords
who brutalize and exploit communities for economic
gain? Or when we are all subject to the darker side of
globalization, where international commerce brings new
but poorly distributed wealth, where helpless children are
recruited into armies or sold on the internet for exploitive
purposes, where environmental degradation inflicts a high
cost on the smallest countries, which can least afford it?
Our world on the eve of the millennium is
increasingly shaped by these and a variety of other direct
threats to people. If we the peoples were to have the
chance to rethink the Preamble to the Charter, we might
well say that we are determined to save existing
generations from the grave new risks to their personal and
family security.
It is true that there is another perspective, one that
gives a glimmer of hope. We could point with some
satisfaction to the fact that, through the combined efforts
of people working together across borders, there is an
emerging sense of accomplishment in responding to these
new threats to human security.
As of today, 86 nations have ratified the Convention
on antipersonnel mines, ushering in a legal regime and a
plan of action that will save the lives of thousands.
Working together last year, 120 nations voted in
favour of an International Criminal Court, which will
establish individual accountability for crimes against
humanity.
In the field of conflict, the United Nations is now
attempting to rebuild the broken fields of Kosovo after an
unprecedented intervention for humanitarian reasons. And
in East Timor, peacekeepers are bringing order to that
long-troubled land.
So we the peoples have not given up in the face of
the confusion, turmoil and misery which beset our world;
and we still search through the corridors of this building
for words of cooperation and acts of consensus.
(spoke in French)
But it is not easy, because many forget that it is we
the peoples, all the world's people, whom we are here to
serve, not just their particular national interests. Too many
protect their prerogatives, engage in exclusive power
politics or refuse to pay their bills, thereby paralysing the
institution and rendering it incapable of meeting the
challenges to our collective well-being.
16


It is difficult to promote an agenda for the security of
people when some stand opposed, on the basis of a desire
to protect at all costs the sovereignty of the State. Of
course, State sovereignty remains a fundamental tenet of
peace and security; but it is not absolute, and it is not a
shield behind which the most egregious violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms can be hidden.
It is time, therefore, for we the peoples represented in
this Assembly to reassess our influence and make our
voices heard.
(spoke in English)
There is a new road map to lead the way. Last week
the Secretary-General tabled a report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957) in which he
captures many of today's challenges and sets out 40
recommendations for action.
The heaviest burden falls on the Security Council. The
search for global peace increasingly turns on issues of
personal safety. Modern conflict takes a huge,
disproportionate toll on civilians. In this world, the
protection of civilians must be central to the Council's
work. It must provide the subtext for our future collective
action and the impetus behind our efforts to prevent
conflict, keep the peace, enforce sanctions and support the
collective will of the United Nations.
The way ahead is not without obstacles. There are
legitimate questions about the purposes, limits and
standards for Council engagement for humanitarian ends,
which itself also present difficult contradictions with regard
to the principle of non-interference. Clear and consistent
criteria are needed against which the necessity or otherwise
of humanitarian intervention — including enforcement —
can be judged and applied. These tests must be very
demanding: the basis must be the existence of fundamental
breaches of international humanitarian and human rights
law.
The human dimension makes it imperative that the
Council adapt the blunt instrument of sanctions into a
targeted tool so that they hurt where they are supposed to
hurt. The Council needs also to show the resolve to
implement sanctions once they are in place. This is
Canada's objective as chairman of the Council's Angola
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) — to develop tougher measures to constrain the
trade in arms and diamonds, thereby making it more
difficult for UNITA to wage war. It is time to tackle the
new war economy in which a direct relationship exists
between certain businesses, mercenaries and warlords, a
relationship that perpetuates misery, conflict and the
victimization of innocent people.
A human security agenda highlights the urgent need
to face clearly the issue of the Council's representation
and its decision-making processes, especially the
inappropriate use and persistent threat of the veto where
it can compromise, complicate and slow down
determined, urgent international action to protect people.
The Council needs to come to grips with these challenges
if it is to maintain its credibility in the eyes of the people
it serves. Membership in the Council is a trust, and
Council members need to demonstrate their capacity to
maintain that trust.
The issues raised by the Secretary-General in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict are
issues that plague all peoples. The Secretary-General's
proposals in fact go beyond the purview of just the
Security Council; the onus for taking action lies with all
Member States. For that reason, I strongly urge that the
General Assembly should begin consideration of this
report and move quickly to establish mechanisms to give
effect to its recommendations, including a system of
reporting to review implementation. Towards this end,
Canada looks forward to working with the Secretary-
General and fellow Member States to establish a “friends
of civilians in armed conflict” group to help guide these
efforts.
To protect civilians in armed conflict, the Assembly
has the means to enable the United Nations to act more
quickly; the moral authority to establish universal
standards that hold us all accountable; and the legitimacy
to direct efforts into new areas of global endeavour. The
ability to respond rapidly when the security of civilians is
threatened is essential. Giving the United Nations a rapid
response capability — particularly through the creation of
a United Nations headquarters for rapid deployment —
would be an important step. How much more effective
could the United Nations have been in East Timor or in
Kosovo if such a capability had existed?
The civilian side of peace operations — the police
and the judges, the civil servants and the human rights
experts — is also of growing importance, but insufficient
capacity for rapid deployment is a problem here too.
Clearly the “White Helmets” are as critical to building
peace as the Blue Helmets, and they deserve no less of
our attention. Those of us who are able might start by
17


improving our respective national capacity to make
contributions to be put at the service of the United Nations.
This is something my Government has begun and is
working to improve. Globally binding humanitarian and
human rights standards for behaviour and practical
mechanisms to hold transgressors accountable would also
advance the security of people subjected to the horrors of
armed conflict.
The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court was a qualitative step forward. It will help
to end the culture of impunity and protect all people against
the most egregious violations of humanitarian law. The
Assembly's priority now should be to bring the Court to
life. This means continued cooperation from us all in
building the technical underpinnings of this Court. It also
means ensuring prompt and widespread ratification of the
Court's Statute.
Strengthened standards and strategies are needed
elsewhere. For example, negotiating the strongest possible
optional protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, which should be accompanied by a comprehensive
action plan, will help to confront one of the most heinous
aspects of modern warfare and other conflict.
We agree with the Secretary-General that more must
be done to protect humanitarian workers who risk their
lives to help the victims of war. That is why Canada will
be seeking an additional protocol to the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel to
provide legal protection to all personnel working in
situations of armed conflict, including a broader range of
non-governmental organizations and locally employed
personnel.
Finally, the Assembly can direct its efforts towards
making the safety of people the emphasis in a wider range
of global endeavours.
(spoke in French)
The greatest threat to human safety remains the
possibility of annihilation by nuclear or other weapons of
mass destruction. Yet the non-proliferation regime that we
have painstakingly built over the past 50 years remains
fragile. We should now ensure that the obligations under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are
respected, and we should implement the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and reduce the risk that nuclear
weapons pose to our collective security.
Human security is also the impetus behind efforts to
address the problem of small arms, which kill in conflict
zones as well as on neighbourhood streets. This is a
global challenge that requires a global solution. We
should therefore convene a conference on the illicit traffic
in small arms, with a comprehensive agenda.
(spoke in English)
Transnational crime, including the illicit drug trade,
terrorism and human smuggling, is a closely related
challenge. It has a direct impact on the safety of all our
people. The conclusion of an effective United Nations
transnational organized crime convention and its protocols
would be a start to providing that protection.
Taken together, those efforts would be a strong
beginning to orienting the Assembly to meet the real
security needs of people today. I must be very blunt:
improvement in human security is a necessary condition
for success in the other important actions that we take to
advance human, economic, aid and trade development.
Farmers cannot work fields strewn with mines. Children
cannot learn when they are abused and brutalized by war.
Investors will not send money to regions racked by
conflict. Societies cannot flourish when resources are
pillaged to fuel violence and people are victimized by
terror.
Ultimately, freedom from fear is intimately
connected to the freedom from want. And it is freedom
from fear for all peoples — which is at the heart of the
Secretary-General's report and his recommendations —
that provides the United Nations with a clear, defining
role at the century's close. Our collective efforts towards
that end will give concrete expression to the hopes and
dreams of the generation that first made “we the peoples”
the basis for this Organization. Next year's Millennium
Assembly and summit offer an opportunity to articulate a
vision of the United Nations that places the safety of
people at the centre of its agenda.
The United Nations cannot do it all. The challenges
to advancing human safety are complex. Regional
organizations play an important role. Practical cooperation
between countries can address specific problems and the
participation of members of civil society and non-
governmental organizations is also imperative. But
security for all of us begins and ends with a strong,
effective United Nations focused on this goal. We the
peoples should resolve to work together to achieve this
end.







The
sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations is cause for
inspiration, concern and action. It is a source of
inspiration because 60 years of collective action for
peace and development is an anniversary to celebrate.
And what better time to do so than on the International
Day of Peace? It is a cause for concern because the
challenges, far from diminishing, have continued to
grow, and we have not reached a consensus on a whole
range of essential reforms. Some important
components are missing. It is a call for action because
all of us here have recognized that the United Nations
remains an indispensable instrument and because
change is still needed. We have no choice: we must
move forward.
But we have come a long way. Two years ago, the
United Nations was in a sorry state indeed; the
situation in Iraq not only had divided the membership
but had left deep scars within our institution. That is
why I pay tribute to the Secretary-General for having
established the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, whose report (A/59/565) has
truly revolutionized how all of us think about the
Organization’s future.
Jeffrey Sachs and his colleagues also delivered to
us a remarkable document on “Investing in
Development” — development that Canada has done
so much to promote ever since the era of Lester
Pearson. In “In larger freedom” (A/59/2005), the
Secretary-General summarized that work with clarity
and discernment and set out an ambitious plan for us.
We have not adopted all of his recommendations — far
from it. We could have, and should have, done better.
The summit is by no means the end of the debate. To
the contrary, we have a mandate to continue our efforts
and to make this sixtieth-anniversary year a year of
reform.
We are all aware of the risks of unilateralism or
piecemeal multilateralism. But we are not sufficiently
aware that humanity’s future lies in accepting the
inextricable links among security, development and
human rights.
To predict the future is to understand the past, so
it behoves us all to look back over the 60 years of our
Organization. The contribution of the United Nations
to the progress of humanity is indisputable. The
Organization’s successes, more than its failures, show
us the path to take so that we can meet current and
future challenges.
Let us not forget that in 1945 the whole world
was rising from ruins and States were determined that
that would never happen again. So it is not surprising
that the first objective expressed in the Charter of the
United Nations centred on security so as to “save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
mankind”.
We have known the horrors of war over the past
60 years, but we have avoided descending into the hell
of a third world war. How did we do that? At the
United Nations, the super-Powers had no choice. Under
the aegis of the Organization, they concluded major
disarmament and arms control agreements. In sum, the
role played by the United Nations in ending the stand
off between East and West is one of the greatest
successes of the past century.
(spoke in English)
Sixty years ago, the nations meeting in San
Francisco set the second objective: to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of
the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small. The founders of
the United Nations foresaw that if we were to avoid the
conflicts of the past, the world of tomorrow needed to
be more human. With that in mind, Canada’s John
Humphrey worked hard to help draft the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
14

We have become ever more demanding about the
protection of human rights — including women’s
rights — as well we should be. We are duty-bound to
prevent or combat flagrant violations, which still
plague the world. The Commission on Human Rights
has played a key role in that respect, but its serious
shortcomings unfortunately eclipse its valuable
contributions, necessitating its replacement.
Mr. Mwakwere (Kenya), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
History shows that democracy and human rights
go hand in hand. The United Nations has entrenched
human rights through a series of legal instruments that
Governments concluded under the Organization’s aegis
and has extended a range of protections, such as
conventions on eliminating discrimination against
women, on children’s rights and against torture.
The United Nations remains a key forum for
debating human rights failures around the world. And
it is in that area that the Organization has played a
leading role in changing global culture, fostering the
acceptance of new standards and setting criteria for
judging Governments’ actions. That is another
remarkable success for the United Nations.
The third objective of the Charter called on
Members to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained.
For 60 years, the United Nations has been at the heart
of a vast network of bilateral and regional treaties
covering nearly the gamut of international relations. In
so doing, the Organization has helped to bring about an
infinitely more integrated world where interactions
among peoples take place in a predictable fashion and
within a defined regulatory framework. This global
legal framework is the foundation of peace. Where the
framework has not yet taken shape, conflicts multiply.
The world needs the United Nations to perfect this
tremendous asset.
The fourth objective of the Charter touched at the
heart of our debate today on the Millennium
Development Goals, calling on members to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom. That message was prophetic at the time. The
founders of the United Nations already foresaw that
beyond the massive destruction of 1939 to 1945, a
fundamental poverty afflicted almost every country and
region in the world — a poverty that had to be fought
unwaveringly.
Today, we salute their hope and their desire to
create a better, safer and more prosperous world.
Among the surest ways in which to create that type of
world are the growing participation of women in
economic, civil and political life and the emergence of
a middle class, both of which justify hope for real
progress on the road to growth. Those promising trends
need to be accelerated.
The United Nations has played a fundamental
role on that front. Its specialized agencies and affiliates
have helped set development objectives and have
delivered the bulk of international aid. Thanks to those
efforts, the world is a better place to live in today. And
today, five years after the Millennium Development
Goals were adopted, the United Nations is where the
world’s nations recall their common commitment to
development, with a keener understanding, since the
Monterrey summit, of the obligations that we all must
bear.
With respect to the four major objectives of the
Charter, comparing ideals against reality inevitably
brings disappointment. For each major step forward,
there have been many failures, in particular the absence
of a collective will to adapt our institution to current
needs.
Where are we now, and what do we need to do to
better respond to our hopes? The starting point is
clearly the document (resolution 60/1) approved by
heads of State or Government last week. That
document is a foundation on which, with a great deal
of political will on the part of all Members, we can
think of renewing the United Nations. In any case, we
have a working framework for the years to come.
I am especially pleased that the document
includes strong references to development and to the
values and principles that inspire us. The declaration
also provides clear, important directions on United
Nations management, transparency and accountability.
But we need to go much further in that direction.
I would now like to address some of the points
raised in the declaration. First is the “responsibility to
protect”. In recognizing that responsibility, this body
has taken a step that goes beyond utterances of “Never
again” — a step that brings us closer to making
15

genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
things of the past. We now need to implement it.
Secondly, with respect to the Human Rights
Council, Canada is disappointed that members did not
show greater courage. We have not established the
Council; we have only the mandate to work on that
issue this year. We need such a Council because it will
help us take an in-depth look at situations of concern to
us, such as that in Iran. Canada’s position is clear: the
Council must be a permanent body, with members
elected by a two-thirds majority, on the basis of
specific criteria, and it must provide for a system of
peer review, starting with the countries that will sit on
the Council. I am pleased, however, that the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will have a bigger
budget.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, let me turn to the Peacebuilding
Commission. Here again, our work is unfinished. A
reference to a sequential relationship between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
could have been a solution to the question of relations
between the Commission and existing bodies.
The fourth point is global health. The United
Nations must make every effort to protect threatened
populations. HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria still
plague the world, to our collective shame. We have a
shared responsibility to eliminate those diseases; we
can and must do better. We need to prepare for
pandemics, including avian flu, on which Canada
recently hosted an international meeting of health
ministers.
Fifthly, with respect to terrorism, the attacks that
took place this past summer in London, in Egypt and
elsewhere make it more necessary than ever that there
be a global convention in the war on terror.
But we must also bear in mind that the overall
global security architecture must be strengthened, from
light weapons to weapons of mass destruction,
including the whole range of disarmament and arms
control measures. We can certainly be heartened by the
progress that is being made in the Middle East, Haiti,
the Sudan and Afghanistan, high-priority regions for
Canada and where United Nations action is often
exemplary. But that success remains fragile, and the
commitment of the United Nations must continue.
Sixthly, concerning the environment, if we want
to leave future generations a planet that is a healthy
place to live, we need jointly to manage its
environment. In less than two months, Montreal will
play host to a climate-change conference that should
represent a milestone in terms of our common thinking
and action in the face of that phenomenon. We will be
discussing the progress made in implementing the
Kyoto Protocol and new possibilities for action in the
decades to come.
Let me conclude with a few thoughts on what the
final document does not say, or at least does not say
well.
First, on disarmament, it is deplorable that a
United Nations outcome document could contain not
one paragraph on disarmament and non-proliferation at
a time when we are debating Iran’s and North Korea’s
nuclear programmes.
Secondly, on women’s rights, it is deeply
regrettable that the document could not even reiterate
as forcefully the commitments made 10 years ago in
Beijing or Cairo on women’s rights and gender
equality, despite the fact that they lie at the very heart
of the Millennium Development Goals. All Member
States need to implement their provisions and move
from promises to action.
Thirdly, on the International Criminal Court,
Canada regrets the absence of any reference in the
document to the International Criminal Court, as well
as its silence on commitments to end impunity. It is
imperative that the United Nations address the issue of
impunity. Two years ago, when the Rome Statute came
into force, the Secretary- General clearly stated that
“the time is at last coming when humanity no longer
has to bear impotent witness to the worst atrocities,
because those tempted to commit such crimes will
know that justice awaits them”.
We urge all States to sign and ratify the Rome
Statute. Together, we will break the cycle of impunity,
and justice will be done for the victims of such crimes.
We are meeting in New York today to help solve
humanity’s problems. But while this Hall has witnessed
too many unresolved debates and far too much costly
inaction, the challenges and problems we discuss lie far
afield. Over the years we have confronted grave
challenges in the Sudan, Haiti, Kosovo and Rwanda,
and in many other places. In some cases, we can hold
16

our heads high; in others, we need to recognize, and
learn from, our mistakes and failures. I think we have
charted the course, but we still have far to travel. On behalf
of President Bush and all of the American people,
welcome to New York City.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, my fellow
citizens have experienced the compassion of the United
Nations. I want to thank Secretary-General Annan for
mobilizing the support of this institution. I also want to
thank the representatives of the 126 countries that have
offered assistance in our relief efforts. The United
States will never forget their generosity in our time of
need.
In moments of tumultuous historical change,
leaders must become architects of a better world. We
must survey the new international landscape, lay firm
foundations of moral principle and build institutions
8

that reflect our unique moment in history. It is those
institutions that enable citizens of conviction to lead us
ever closer to the ideals of justice that stir every soul:
the universal desire for security, prosperity, liberty and
dignity.
Sixty years ago was just such a time of
transformation. After one of the greatest cataclysms in
world history, the United States joined with visionary
builders from over 50 countries to create the United
Nations. We placed the enduring principles of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the foundation of
the United Nations Charter. We built an institution that
has helped to support a peaceful world order for six
decades. Today, however, with the end of the cold war
and the rise of globalization and the emergence of new
threats, the very terrain of international politics has
shifted beneath our feet. In this new world we must
again embrace the challenge of building for the future.
The time to reform the United Nations is now. We
must seize this opportunity together. Chapter I, Article
1, of the Charter of the United Nations proclaims the
four purposes of the United Nations, great aspirations
that have stood the test of time. But consider what
different forms they take today, in 2005, as opposed to
1945, when they were first declared.
The first purpose of the United Nations is to help
maintain international peace and security. In 1945 the
most serious threats to peace and security emerged
between States, and were largely defined by their
borders. Today, however, the greatest threats we face
emerge within States, and melt through their borders:
transnational threats like terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons, pandemic disease and trafficking in human
beings.
The second purpose of this institution, as written
in the United Nations Charter, is to develop friendly
relations among nations, based on equal rights and the
self-determination of all peoples. In 1945, a life of
liberty and dignity was more an aspiration than a
reality for a majority of the world’s people. Today,
however, more nations than ever have enshrined the
principles of democracy and human rights — a true
moral triumph that will be complete only when all
individuals are secure in their basic freedoms.
The third purpose of the United Nations is to
achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems. In 1945, the fear was that
strong, aggressive States, eager and able to expand
their frontiers with force, would be the primary cause
of international problems. Today, however, it is clear
that weak and poorly governed States, unwilling or
incapable of ruling their countries with justice, are the
principal source of global crises, from civil war and
genocide to extreme poverty and humanitarian disaster.
The final purpose of the United Nations, as the
Charter states, is to be a centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations in the attainment of common ends.
In 1945, the world’s leaders joined together to build an
institutional partnership that could address the shared
challenges of their time. Today, faced with the realities
of a new world, we must transform the United Nations
to meet the shared challenges of our time.
The Members of this body must work together to
strengthen security in a world threatened by stateless
extremists. Today, I call on the nations of the world to
ratify the comprehensive convention on terrorism. No
cause, no movement and no grievance can justify the
intentional killing of innocent civilians and non-
combatants. That is unacceptable by any moral
standard. It is time for every Member of the United
Nations to outlaw acts of international terrorism.
We must also work together to promote
prosperity and development in a world of great
potential. The United States is committed to the
Millennium Development Goals. And at the Monterrey
Conference three years ago all nations agreed that
development must be a two-way street. Donor
countries have a responsibility to increase their
assistance to developing nations. And developing
nations have a responsibility to govern justly, advance
economic liberty and invest in their people. The
Monterrey Consensus is working.
Now is not the time to revert to old, failed
thinking about development. Countries representing
three quarters of the developing world’s population are
on a pace to meet the targets of the Millennium
Declaration by 2015.
And, as President Bush said on Wednesday, the
United States is prepared to take new action to
accelerate this progress: we will eliminate all tariffs
and subsidies that distort free trade — as other nations
do the same.
Members of the United Nations must work
together as well to support democracy in a world of
expanding liberty. To advance this common purpose, in
9

2004 President Bush proposed the creation of a
democracy fund. With the broad support of this body,
we have made it a reality. The Fund is now receiving
donations in cash and in kind from countries large and
small that wish to help other nations lay the
foundations of democracy. Showing its leadership as
the world’s largest democracy, India made the generous
opening pledge of $10 million.
Now, to be sure, when speaking about democracy,
the United States has every reason for humility. After
all, it was only in my lifetime that America guaranteed
the right to vote for all its citizens. Obviously, the path
to democracy is long and imperfect and different for
every nation. But the principles of democracy are
universal, as is the desire for them. And the United
Nations must support every country that embraces the
challenge of self-government. In Afghanistan, Iraq,
Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and throughout the
world, peoples who want to build democracy deserve
our help.
The many goals we share are great indeed. And
the United Nations has a major role to play in their
achievement. But for this institution to become an
engine of change in the twenty-first century, it must
now change itself. The United Nations must launch a
lasting revolution of reform.
The United Nations summit declaration
(resolution 60/1), which every head of State endorsed
this week, expresses a global consensus on the fact that
reform is imperative. I want to thank former General
Assembly President Ping for his tireless hard work.
Our challenge now, under President Eliasson’s
leadership, is to enact the vital reforms that will make
the United Nations more accountable to its Members,
more suited to new challenges and more faithful to its
founding purposes.
The United States welcomes the commitment of
all leaders to establish a new Peacebuilding
Commission. Now, we must embrace the difficult task
of implementing that vision. A Peacebuilding
Commission should plan for post-conflict missions
before crises erupt. And it must help to coordinate
reconstruction efforts after the fighting stops. In a
world threatened by civil strife, the United Nations
needs to be better prepared to help countries rebuild in
the aftermath of conflict.
We are also pleased that the world’s leaders have
recognized the importance of establishing a new
Human Rights Council. But it will take a lot of hard
work in the coming months to realize that goal. The
Human Rights Council must have fewer members, less
politics and more credibility. And it should never,
never, empower brutal dictatorships to sit in judgement
of responsible democracies. The Human Rights
Council must have the moral authority to condemn all
violators of human rights, even those that sit among us
in this Hall.
Finally, we welcome the promise of the world’s
leaders to make the United Nations a more effective
and a more principled institution. As President Bush
said on Wednesday (see A/60/PV.2), the United
Nations must stand for integrity and live by the high
standards it sets for others. For the United Nations to
champion democracy more legitimately, we must
increase the transparency and the accountability of this
institution. For the United Nations to promote
prosperity more credibly, tougher ethics rules and
greater internal oversight are needed to ensure the
highest professional standards. And to make the United
Nations relevant to the challenges of today, the purpose
and the performance of all United Nations programmes
must be reviewed thoroughly, consistently and
comprehensively.
Our fellow citizens deserve a United Nations that
commands their respect and is worthy of their hard-
earned tax dollars. In a democracy, leaders must be
able to justify that their people’s money is indeed being
well spent.
Real progress on those fundamental reforms will
prove that the United Nations can address greater
issues of change, in particular the reform of the
Security Council. We want that important body to
reflect the world as it is in 2005, not as it was in 1945.
The United States is open to expanding the Security
Council. We have long supported a permanent seat for
Japan. And we believe that developing countries
deserve greater representation on that body. All this
would make for a more effective Security Council.
And the Security Council must be effective. It
must be able to deal with great challenges such as
terrorism and nuclear proliferation, especially when it
faces real threats and when countries such as Iran
threaten the effectiveness of the global non-
proliferation regime. When diplomacy has been
10

exhausted, the Security Council must become involved.
Questions about Iran’s nuclear activities remain
unanswered, despite repeated efforts by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. And after
agreeing to negotiate with Europe, Iran unilaterally
walked away from the talks and restarted its nuclear
programmes. Iran should return to the negotiations
with the European Union three and abandon forever its
plans for a nuclear-weapons capability.
The experience of recent years has reinforced the
universal truth that international institutions are only as
strong and effective and relevant as their members
choose to make them. The United Nations is no
different.
The United States believes in a United Nations
that is strong and effective. And we have ambitious
hopes for its future.
So in this year, as the United Nations marks its
sixtieth anniversary, let us recommit ourselves to
principled action. Let us embrace the same spirit of
creation that moved the builders and leaders of 1945.
And let us reform this great institution to meet the
challenges of a new era.﻿
I should like to begin, Sir, by extending my and Canada's congratulations and appreciation to you on your assumption of the responsibilities and office of the presidency of the General Assembly.
A year ago the atmosphere in the Assembly was heavy with a sense of crisis. The financial shortfall of the United Nations, serious in itself, was also a symptom of a deeper worry about the very existence of the Organization.
Canada, and other friends of the United Nations, used this rostrum to call for reform. I am pleased today to note that substantial reform has begun. 7hat is both a tribute to the men and women who make this Organization work and testimony to the recognition by most nations that a strong United Nations is essential to world peace. We are especially impressed by the United Nations resolve to extend reform beyond the institutions in New York to United Nations economic and social institutions throughout the world.
For our part, Canada made a point of paying our 1987 assessment fully and early. We hope other nations will quickly pay their current and past assessments. Those that call for internal reform have a particular obligation and opportunity to encourage it once it begins. That good example would increase the pressure upon other Powers whose contributions are consistently delinquent.
During the past year this real internal reform has been matched by solid progress on many of the major issues of concern to the United Nations. Sometimes that progress occurred outside this multilateral Organization - as, for example, in the historic breakthrough on an arms agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union, in the steady pressure against apartheid mounted by the Commonwealth, and in the initiative towards peace launched by the five Presidents of Central America. But in many other cases the world's movement forward was rooted here. Those cases are worth enumerating.
In the ongoing war between Iran and Iraq, Security Council resolution 598 (1987) reflects a welcome political will and unanimity in the Security Council, and the Secretary-General is to be commended for his patient, persistent mediation. The Secretary-General's mission was not as successful as we all had hoped. And the speech this morning by the President of Iran can only be characterized as destructive and deeply disappointing. Therefore the Security Council should be reconvened to take the next step. Canada would fully support implementation of the axiomatic second half of resolution 598 (1987) - the application of sanctions.
At the Seventh United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) , the consensus statement on trade, debt and commodities may presage a new era of co-operation between developed and developing countries. UNCTAD VII was an example of an international conference for whose outcome the prognosis was uniformly gloomy. The doubters were wrong. The United Nations scored a major success.
The special session on Africa is beginning to yield concrete results, albeit there is a long way yet to go. The international community clearly now recognizes that the majority of African countries are making great efforts to turn their economies around. But the international community must equally recognize that the debt situation for many African countries is desperate and must be addressed in new and innovative ways or the entire recovery programme may collapse.
In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General's appointment of the Advisory Panel on Resource Flows. We anxiously await its report. As the representative of Zaire has just indicated, Canada is so concerned about this issue that at the Francophone Summit we announced the cancellation of official development assistance debt for several countries in francophone Africa. Next month, at the Commonwealth Conference, we will do the same for countries of Anglophone Africa.	 
The Brundtland Commission has produced a blunt and clear report on the urgency of protecting our resources and environment. In that spirit, in Montreal last week nations signed an ozone Treaty controlling the emissions of chloro fluro carbons. Dr. Mostafa Tolba, Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, called it 'the first truly global treaty that offers protection to every single human being on this planet.' Our Government believes that Montreal Treaty will serve as a model for future international agreements on the environment.
The Conference on disarmament and development, which has just concluded, yielded a remarkable consensus document, holding disarmament and development as essential to international security. It graphically demonstrated the capacity of the Organization to find agreement in the most complex fields.
The World Health Organization is recognized as a crucial resource for gathering the statistics and carrying out the planning that are necessary as countries struggle to master the world-wide AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) epidemic.
Within its own doors, the United Nations has made social strides in another field: the equal rights of women. In 41 years there had not been even one woman permanently appointed as an Under-Secretary-General. Now there are three, and we in Canada take particular satisfaction that the first woman appointed is an outstanding Canadian, Madame Therese Paguet-Sevigny, under-Secretary-General in the Department of Public Information,
There have been other achievements in the past year: the successful Vienna international Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking; the coming into force of the Convention against torture  the International Maritime Organization draft convention on maritime security; and the progress made on verification by the United Nations Disarmament Commission, with which Canada is proud to be associated. This is proof of the worth and vitality of the United Nations and clear evidence of the advantages to be derived from continuing to confront the world's problems together.
The great purpose of the United Nations is to extend the reach of peace and justice in the world. Sometimes, as in the war between Iran and Iraq, its role becomes most acute when all other efforts have failed. In other cases it can encourage regional initiatives that may lead to peace where peace is threatened, or focus international attention upon injustice that must end. I want today to speak of one initiative that we must encourage and one injustice that we must end. 
The Initiative is in Central America, where the presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua have joined together in a genuine effort by all parties to settle their differences peacefully. The surprisingly positive outcome of the Guatemala summit meeting was the result of many factors. They included the foundations laid by Contadora and the Contadora Support Groups, the preparatory work of the Central America countries and the concessions made at the summit by each of the five presidents. That achievement was applauded by us all. But it was only the first of many steps along a difficult road.
Canadian aid to Central America has been steadily increasing, as has our funding and our acceptance of refugees. We have expressed our view that the root problem in Central America is poverty, not ideology  that the real need is development assistance, not military activity, and that intervention by outside Powers will only aggravate the tension. We have supported the Contadora process and have made available to Contadora the expertise Canadians have acquired in the techniques of peace-keeping.
Immediately after the Guatemala summit two senior officials of our Government visited Central America to discuss what more Canada might do. I will be visiting the region myself later this autumn.
Canada supports the initiatives of the Central America presidents. We are prepared to provide our expertise in the design and development of verification and control mechanisms which, once peace is possible, can help it endure. The disputes must be resolved by those actually Involved in the conflict, but Canada is prepared to contribute to that process in any direct and practical way open to us.
The injustice to which I referred earlier is apartheid. Canada's position is clear and on the record. We have acted upon all of the sanctions recommended by the Nassau Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government. We have Imposed a ban both on new investment in South Africa and re-investment of profits. We have banned the importation of coal, iron and steel. We have banned the promotion of tourism and ended air links. In the first six months of 1987 Canada reduced its imports from South Africa by 51 per cent. Furthermore, we have made it clear that, if other measures fail, we ate prepared to end our economic and diplomatic relations with South Africa, We are helping the victims of apartheid with scholarships, legal aid and other assistance. We contribute substantially to the development of the front-line States, both bilaterally and through the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC). We apply our influence, whether it is effective, to build the pressures against apartheid.
The Prime Minister of Canada met with the leaders of Zimbabwe and Zambia and Botswana in Victoria Falls in February, and I visited southern Africa six weeks ago, a visit which included a meeting in Pretoria with the South African Foreign Minister. Olivet Tambo visited Ottawa a month ago and met with our Prime Minister and other Canadian leaders. Early in September it was our honour to act as host to the second summit of La Francophonie in Quebec City, which condemned apartheid and established a scholarship programme for black South Africans. Next month, in Vancouver, we shall act as host to the heads of Government of the Commonwealth, the international family to which South Africa once belonged.
We are at a critical stage in the campaign to end apartheid. There must be no relenting in that campaign, no pause in the pressure, because a pause might suggest that apartheid is acceptable, and it is not. The pressure against apartheid must continue and increase, and the challenge, in the United Nations and elsewhere, is to find peaceful and effective means to build that pressure. It is not enough to ask others to act.
It is Canada's view that the sanctions imposed upon South Africa have been effective, both economically and psychologically. While the Government of South Africa has reacted by limiting liberty even more, growing numbers of individual South Africans have reached out for reform, in meetings in Lusaka and Dakar and in the private contacts, which we must multiply.
The instability in southern Africa is both an ally and a product of apartheid. One of the most wrenching conversations I have had was with Canadian aid workers in Mozambique who fear that the projects they build to help people will become targets of terrorists and put at risk the very lives they are working to improve. An essential part of the challenge in southern Africa is thus to bring more stability to the front-line States.
Before I conclude my remarks I want to applaud again the new vitality that has been injected into the global arms-control and disarmament process through the important announcement that the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed in principle to eliminate intermediate and short-range nuclear missiles. Radical reduction in nuclear arms has always been the core of Canadian policy in this area. We should celebrate the fact that this is the first time a prospective agreement will actually eliminate nuclear weapons. That is just the initial step in a long and difficult process, but, with continued determination and resolve, we can hope to move to agreements on strategic weapons, on chemical weapons, on conventional weapons, and on a comprehensive test ban.
I began by talking about the atmosphere of crisis which was so pervasive as we met last year. Today, we must all surely take satisfaction from the atmosphere of hope that surrounds us; hope, because both globally and regionally there is a recognition that a peaceful and secure world is of universal benefit and worthy of relentless pursuit) hope, because the social and economic evils that beset us are being addressed in a meaningful way) and, finally, hope, because this Organization of ours, the United Nations, is reasserting its capacity to play the central role that it was created and designed to play in dealing with the ills that still plague the international community. The United Nations agenda stretches before us - Afghanistan, Kampuchea, Cyprus, peace in the Middle East between Israel and the Arab States, an end to terrorism, and the fundamental human struggle to eradicate hunger and injustice. Somehow, it feels as though we are closer this year than last to tackling that agenda.
﻿Let me first welcome the Secretary-General back from his pilgrimage for peace in the Middle East. Hundreds of thousands have already fallen in the bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq. All men and women of goodwill pray that the carnage can soon be stopped, and we pray that the Secretary-General proves to be not only a pilgrim but also the architect of a lasting peace between those two nations. Mr. Secretary-General, the United States supports you, and may God guide you in your labours ahead.
Like the Secretary-General, all of us here today are on a kind of pilgrimage. We come from every continent, every race and most religions to this great Hall of hope where, in the name of peace, we practise diplomacy. Now diplomacy, of course, is a subtle and nuance craft - so much so that it is said that when one of the most wily diplomats of the nineteenth century passed away, other diplomats asked, on reports of his death, 'What do you suppose the old fox meant by that?'
But true statesmanship requires not merely skill but something greater, something we call vision, a grasp of the present and of the possibilities of the future. I have come here today to map out for you my own vision of the world's future - one, I believe, that, in its essential elements, is shared by all Americans. And I hope those who see things differently will not mind if I say that we in the United States believe that the place to look first for the shape of the future is not in continental masses and sea lanes, although geography is obviously, of great importance. Neither is it in national reserves of blood and iron or on the other hand, of money and industrial capacity, although military and economic strength are also, of course, crucial. We begin with something that is far simpler and yet far more profound - the human heart.
All over the world today, the yearnings of the human heart are redirecting in course of international affairs, putting the lie to the myth of materialism and historical determinism. We have only to open our eyes to see the simple aspirations of ordinary people writ large on the record of our times.
Last year in the Philippines, ordinary people rekindled the spirit of democracy and restored the electoral process. Some said they had performed a miracle, and, if so, a similar miracle - a transition to democracy - is taking place in the Republic of Korea. Haiti, too, is making a transition. Some despair when these new young democracies face conflicts or challenges, but growing pains are normal in democracies. The United States had them - as has every other democracy on earth.
In Latin America, too, one can hear the voices of freedom echo from the pea з and across the plains. It is the song of ordinary people marching, not in uniforms and not in military file, but, rather, one by one in simple, everyday working clothes - marching to the polls. Ten years ago, only a third of the people in La in America and the Caribbean lived in democracies or in countries that were turning to democracy. Today over 90 per cent do.
But this world-wide movement to democracy is not the only way in which simple, ordinary people are leading us in this room - we who are said to be the makers of history - leading us Into the future. Around the world, new businesses, new economic growth, new technologies are emerging from the workshops of ordinary people with extraordinary dreams.
Here in the United States  entrepreneurial energy - reinvigorated when we cut taxes and regulations - have fuelled the current economic expansion. According to scholars at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, three quarters of the more than 13.5 million new jobs that we have created in this country since the beginning of our expansion rate from businesses with fewer than 100 employees - businesses started by ordinary people who dared to take a chance. And many of our new high technologies were first developed in the garages of fledgling entrepreneurs. Yet America is not the only or perhaps even the best example of the dynamism and dreams that the freeing of markets set free.
In India and China, freer markets for farmers have led to an explosion in production. In Africa. Governments are rethinking their policies, and where they ate allowing greater economic freedom to farmers, crop production has improved. Meanwhile, in the newly industrialized countries of the Pacific Rim, free markets in services and manufacturing as well as agriculture have led to a soaring of growth and standards of living. The nations of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Japan, Korea and Taiwan have created the true economic miracle of   the last two decades, and in each of them much of the magic came from ordinary people who succeeded as entrepreneurs.
In Latin America, this same lesson of free markets, greater opportunity and growth is being studied and acted on. President Sarney of Brazil spoke for many
others when he said that 'Private initiative is the engine of economic Development. In Brazil we have learned that every time the state's penetration in the economy increases, our liberty decreases.' Yes, policies that release to flight ordinary people's dreams ate spreading around the world. From Colombia t Turkey to Indonesia, Governments are cutting taxes, reviewing their regulations, and opening opportunities for initiative.
There has been much talk in the halls of this building about the 'right to development'. But more and more the evidence is clear that development is not itself a right. It is the product of rights: the right to own property; the right to buy and sell freely; the right to contract; the right to be free of excessive taxation and regulation, of burdensome government. There have been studies that determine that countries with low tax rates have greater growth than those with high rates.
We are all familiar with the phenomenon of the 'underground economy'. The scholar Hernando de Soto and his colleagues have examined the situation of one country - Peru - and described an economy of the poor that bypasses crushing taxation and stifling regulation. This 'informal economy', as the researchers all it, is the principal supplier of many goods and services, and often the only ladder for upward mobility. In the capital city it accounts for almost all public transportation and most street markets. And the researchers concluded that, thanks to the informal economy, 'The poor can work, travel, and have a roof over their heads'. They might have added that, by becoming underground entrepreneurs themselves or by working for them, the poor have become less poor and the nation itself richer.
Those who advocate statist solutions to development should take note - the free market is the other path to development and the one true path. And, unlike many other paths, it leads somewhere. It works.
So this is where I believe we can find the map to the world's future - in the hearts of ordinary people in their hopes for themselves and their children  and in their prayers as they lay themselves and their families to rest each night. These simple people are the giants of the Earth, the true builders of the world and shapers of the centuries to come. And if Indeed they triumph, as I believe they will, we will at last know a world of peace and freedom, opportunity and hope, and, yes, of democracy - a world in which the spirit of mankind at last conquers the old, familiar enemies of famine, disease, tyranny, and war.
This is my vision - America's vision I recognize that some Governments represented in this Hall have other ideas. Some do not believe in democracy or in political, economic, or religious freedom. Some believe in dictatorship - whether by one man, one party, one class, one race, or one vanguard. To those Governments I would only say that the price of oppression is clear. Your economies will fall farther and farther behind. Your people will become more restless. Is it not better to listen to the people's hopes now, rather than their curses later?
And yet, despite our differences, there is one common hope that brought us all to make this common pilgrimage - the hope that mankind will one day beat its swords into the hope of peace. In no place on Earth today is peace more in need of friends than in the Middle East. Its people's yearning for peace is growing. The United States will continue to be an active partner in the efforts of the parties to come together to settle their differences and build a just and lasting peace.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year of the Iran-Iraq war. Two months ago the Security Council adopted a mandatory resolution demanding a cease-fire, withdrawal, and negotiations to end the war. The United States fully supports implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), as we support the Secretary-General's recent mission. We welcomed Iraq's acceptance of that resolution, and remain disappointed at Iran's unwillingness to accept it.
In that regard, I know that the President of Iran will be addressing representatives tomorrow. I take this opportunity to call upon him clearly and unequivocally to state whether Iran accepts Security Council resolution 598 (1987) or not. If the answer is positive, it would be a welcome step and a major breakthrough. If it is negative, the Council has no choice but rapidly to adopt enforcement measures.
For 40 years the United States has made clear its vital interest in the security of the Persian Gulf and the countries that border it. The oil reserves there are of strategic importance to the economies of the free world. We are committed to maintaining the free flow of this oil and to preventing the domination of the region by any hostile Power.
We do not seek confrontation or trouble with Iran or anyone else. Our objective is now, and has been at every stage, finding a means to end the war with no victor and no vanquished. The Increase in out naval presence in the Gulf does not favour one side or the other. It is a response to heightened tensions and followed consultations with our friends in the region. When the tension diminishes, so will our presence.
The United States is gratified by many recent diplomatic developments - the unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), the Arab League's statement at its recent meeting in Tunis, and the Secretary-General's visit. Yet problems remain.
The Soviet Union helped in drafting and reaching an agreement on Security Council resolution 598 (1987). But outside the Security Council, the Soviets have acted differently. They called for removal of our navy from the Gulf, where it has been for 40 years. They made the false accusation that somehow the United States - rather than the war itself - is the source of tension in the Gulf. Such statements are not helpful. They divert attention from the challenge facing us all - a just end to the war.
The United States hopes the Soviets will join the other members of the Security Council in vigorously seeking an end to a conflict that should never have begun, should have ended long ago, and has become one of the great tragedies of the post-war era.
Elsewhere in the region, we see the continuing Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. After nearly eight years, a million casualties, nearly 4 million others driven into exile, and more intense fighting than ever, it is time for the Soviet Union to leave.
The Afghan people roust have the right to determine their own future free of foreign coercion. There is no excuse for prolonging a brutal war or propping up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. That regime offers political proposals that pretend compromise, but really would ensure the perpetuation of the regime's power. Those proposals have failed the only significant test: they have been rejected by the Afghan people. Every day the resistance grows in strength. It is an indispensable patty In the quest for a negotiated solution. 
The world community must continue to insist on genuine self-determination prompt and full Soviet withdrawal  and the return of the refugees to their homes in safety and honour. The attempt may be made to pressure a few countries to change their vote this year, but this body# I know, will vote overwhelmingly as every year before, for Afghan independence and freedom.
We have noted General Secretary Gorbachev's statement of readiness to withdraw. In April I asked the Soviet Union to set a date this year when this withdrawal would begin. I repeat that request now, in this forum for peace. I pledge that, once the Soviet Union shows convincingly that it is ready for a genuine political settlement, the United States is ready to be helpful.
Let me add one final note on this matter. Pakistan, in the face of enormous pressure and intimidation, has given sanctuary to Afghan refugees. We salute the courage of Pakistan and the Pakistani people. They deserve strong support from all of us.
Another regional conflict we all know is taking place in Central America - in Nicaragua.
To the Sandinista delegation here today I say: Your people know the true nature of your regime. They have seen their liberties suppressed. They have seen the promises of 1979 go unfulfilled. They have seen their real wages and personal income fall by half - yes, half - since 1979, while your Party elite live lives of privilege and luxury.
This is why, despite a billion dollars in Soviet-bloc aid last year alone, despite the largest and best equipped army in Central America, you face a popular revolution at home. It is why the democratic resistance is able to operate freely deep in your heartland. But this revolution should come as no surprise to you. I' is only the revolution you promised the people, and that you then betrayed.
The goal of United States policy towards Nicaragua is simple. It is the goal of the Nicaraguan people and the freedom fighters as well: it is democracy - real free, pluralistic, constitutional democracy. Understand this: we will not, and the world community will not, accept phoney 'democratisation' designed to mask the perpetuation of dictatorship.  In this 200th year of our own Constitution, we know that real democracy depends on the safeguards of an institutional structure that prevents a concentration of power. It is that which makes rights secure. The temporary relaxation of controls - which can later be tightened - is not democratisation. Again, to the Sandinistas, I say: we continue to hope that Nicaragua will become part of the genuine democratic transformation that we have seen throughout Central America in this decade. We applaud the principles embodied in the Guatemala agreement, which links the security of the Central American democracies to democratic reform in Nicaragua. Now is the time for you to shut down the military machine that threatens your neighbours and assaults your own people. You must end your stranglehold on internal political activity. You must hold free and fair national elections. The media must be truly free - not censored or	'
intimidated or crippled by indirect measures such as the denial of newsprint or threats against journalists or their families. Exiles must be allowed to return, to minister, to live, to work, and to organize politically. Then, when persecution of religion has ended and the jails no longer contain political prisoners, national reconciliation and democracy will be possible.
Unless this happens, democratisation will be a fraud. And until it happens, we will press for true democracy by supporting those fighting for it.
Freedom in Nicaragua, or Angola, or Afghanistan, or Cambodia, or Eastern Europe, or South Africa or anyplace else on the globe is not just an internal matter. Some time ago the Czech dissident writer, Vaclav Havel, warned the world that
'respect for human rights is the fundamental condition and the sole genuine guarantee of true peace'. And Andrei Sakharov, in his Nobel Lecture, said:  'I am convinced that international confidence, mutual understanding, disarmament, and International security are inconceivable without an open society with freedom of information, freedom of conscience, the right to publish, and the right to travel and choose the country In which one wishes to live.'
Freedom serves peace. The quest for peace must serve the cause of freedom. Patient diplomacy can contribute to a world In which both can flourish. We are heartened by new prospects for improvement in East-West and, particularly. United States-Soviet relations.
Last week Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze visited Washington for talks with me and with Secretary of State Shultz. We discussed the full range of issues. Including my long-standing efforts to achieve, for the first time, deep reductions in United States and Soviet nuclear arms. It was six years ago, for example, that I proposed the 2ero option for United States and Soviet longer-range intermediate-range nuclear missiles. I am pleased that we have now agreed in principle to a truly historic treaty that will eliminate an entire class of United States and Soviet nuclear weapons. We have also agreed to intensify our diplomatic efforts in all areas of mutual Interest.
Towards that end Secretary Shultz and the Foreign Minister will meet again, a month from now, in Moscow, and I will meet again with General Secretary Gorbachev later this fall.
We continue to have our differences and probably always will. But that puts a special responsibility on us to find ways - realistic ways - to bring greater stability to our competition and to show the world a constructive example of the value of communication and of the possibility of peaceful solutions to political problems. Here let me add that we seek, through our strategic defence initiative, to find a way to keep the peace through relying on defence - not offence - for deterrence and for eventually rendering ballistic missiles obsolete. The strategic defence Initiative has greatly enhanced the prospects for real arms reduction. It is a crucial part of our efforts to ensure a safer world and a more stable strategic balance.
We will continue to pursue the goal of arms reduction, particularly the goal that the General Secretary and I agreed upon: a 50 per cent reduction in our respective strategic nuclear arms. We will continue to press the Soviets for more constructive conduct in the settling of regional conflicts. We look to the Soviets to honour the Helsinki accords. We look for greater freedom for the Soviet peoples within their country/ more people-to-people exchanges with our country and Soviet recognition in practice of the right of freedom of movement.
We look forward to a time when things we now regard as sources of friction and even danger can become examples of co-operation between ourselves and the Soviet Union. For instance, I have proposed a collaboration to reduce the barriers between East and West in Berlin, and more broadly in Europe as a whole. Let us work together for a Europe in which force or the threat of force, whether in the form of walls or of guns is no longer an obstacle to free choice by individuals and whole nations, I have also called for more openness in the flow of information from the Soviet Union about its military forces, policies and programmes so that our negotiations about arms reduction can proceed with greater confidence.
We hear much about changes in the Soviet Union. We are intensely interested in these changes. We hear the world glasnost which is translated as 'openness' in English. Openness is a broad term, it means the free, unfettered flow of information, ideas and people, it means political and intellectual liberty in all forms. We hope, for the sake of the peoples of the USSR, that such changes will come. And we hope, for the sake of peace, that it will include a foreign policy that, respects the freedom and independence of other peoples.
No place should be better suited for discussions of peace than this Hall. The first Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, said of the United Nations:
'With the danger of fire, and in the absence of an organized fire department, it is only common sense for the neighbours to join in setting up their own fire brigades.'
Joining together to drown the flames of war - this, together with a universal declaration of human rights, was the founding ideal of the United Nations. It is our continuing challenge to ensure that the United Nations lives up to these hopes.
As the Secretary-General noted some time ago, the risk of anarchy in the world has increased because the fundamental rules of the United Nations Charter have been violated. The General Assembly has repeatedly acknowledged this with regard to the occupation of Afghanistan, The Charter has a concrete practical meaning today because it touches on all the dimensions of human aspiration that I mentioned earlier: the yearning for democracy and freedom, for global peace and for prosperity.
That is why we must protect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from being debased as it was through the infamous 'Zionism is racism' resolution. We cannot permit attempts to control the media and promote censorship under the ruse of a so-called new world information order. We must work against efforts to introduce contentious and non-relevant issues into the work of the specialized and technical agencies where we seek progress on urgent problems, from terrorism to drug trafficking to nuclear proliferation, which threaten us all. Such efforts corrupt the Charter and weaken this Organization.
There have been important administrative and budget reforms. They have helped. The United States is committed to restoring its contribution as reforms progress. But there is still much to do. The United Nations was built on great dreams and great ideals. Sometimes it has strayed. It is time for it to come home. It was Dag Hammarskjold who said:
'The end of all political effort must be the well-being of the individual in a life of safety and freedom.'
Should this not be our credo in the years ahead?

I have spoken today of a vision and of the obstacles to its realization. More than a century ago a young Frenchman, Alexis de Tocqueville, visited America.
After that visit he predicted that the two great Powers of the future world would be, on the one hand, the United States, which would be built, as he said, 'by the ploughshare'; and, on the other hand, Russia, which would go forward, again as he said, 'by the sword'. Yet, need it be so? Cannot swords be turned to ploughshares? Can we and all nations not live in peace?
In our obsession with antagonisms of the moment, we often forget how much unites all the members of humanity. Perhaps we need some outside, universal threat to make us recognize this common bond. I occasionally think how quickly our differences worldwide would vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world. And yet, I ask, is not an alien force already among us? What could be more alien to the universal aspirations of our peoples than war and the threat of war?
Two centuries ago, in a hall much smaller than this one, in Philadelphia, Americans met to draft a constitution. In the course of their debates, one of them said that the new Government, if it was to rise high, must be built on the broadest base - the will and consent of the people. And so it was. And so It has been.
My message today is that the dreams of ordinary people reach to astonishing heights. If we diplomatic pilgrims are to achieve equal altitudes, we must build all we do on the full breadth of humanity's will and consent and the full expanse of the human heart.

Mr. President, may I first associate myself with 
the congratulations extended to you on your 
election as President of the General Assembly.
92.	I am very pleased to have the honour once 
again of addressing the General Assembly after an 
interval of seven years. In an international 
perspective, seven years is not a long time. Yet 
in that interval, profound changes have imposed 
themselves on the world community—changes that 
have distanced us from the relatively optimistic 
days of the mid-1970s.
93.	Simply stated, the world at present is 
facing acute economic and political crises. World 
economic conditions have deteriorated sharply, 
with devastating consequences on the aspirations 
of all nations, rich and poor alike. Political 
upheaval has driven the interna¬tional community 
towards recurrent instability. And these forces 
are closely linked. Political crises generate 
economic consequences and economic dislocations 
breed political instability.
94.	How can we chart a course for our 
institutions that will bring us through this 
period of grave economic dislocation and 
dangerous political tension and serve the 
interests of all members of the General Assembly?
93. When our present institutions, such as the 
United Nations, IMF, the World Bank and GATT, 
first took shape, there was hope of maintaining a 
network of relationships which would match the 
complexity of post-war interdependence and help 
us to stabilize it. Today, the need to manage 
interdependence is even more pressing. But in the 
present crisis there is a disturbing tendency to 
discount and discredit multi¬lateral 
institutions. Because the maze of international 
problems has become more resistant to 
conventional solutions, attacks are being made on 
the institutions through which solutions are 
being approached. The United Nations, in 
particular, has been the object of much criticism.

96.	We cannot fail to realize that 
interdependence is a reality that we must accept, 
for better or for worse, and that no nation can 
hope to resolve its problems on its own. 
Multilateralism, whatever its specific form, is 
our primary hope for counteracting on a world 
scale political and economic aggression which can 
only too easily result from a long period of 
uncertainty and fear.
97.	However, let us have no illusions: the 
credibility and the effectiveness of the 
multilateral institutions depend on the political 
will of nations and of their leaders, and on the 
will to find a collective response to serious 
national and international problems.

98.	Most countries, developed and developing, 
are now grappling with high rates of inflation. 
Slow or stagnant growth and international 
payments imbal¬ances compound already serious 
debt problems. Record high unemployment in many 
countries threatens the social and political 
fabric of our societies and feeds protectionist 
sentiment. At the international level, the 
economic crisis is having a devastating effect on 
growth prospects and on development assistance. 
Debt-servicing problems have reached proportions 
that impose considerable strain on the 
international financial system.
99.	The consequence has been an increasing 
ten¬dency towards economic parochialism. 
Pressures for short-term relief put at risk the 
multilateral system and narrow the longer-term 
prospects for all of us. These pressures must be 
resisted.
100.	The collective response to the current 
economic situation was extensively discussed at 
the annual meeting of IMF and the World Bank held 
recently in Toronto. I was encouraged by the 
determination of participants at that meeting to 
treat economic problems as matters of common 
concern requiring common action.
101.	I should like to underline two important 
themes. First, the magnitude of the financial 
difficulties many of our countries face makes it 
imperative that IMF should have adequate 
resources to ensure that it can continue to play 
its vital role in promoting adjustment in member 
countries. That is why Canada supports a 
substantial increase in quotas during the Eighth 
General Review.
102.	Secondly, the current economic situation has meant that 
development assistance has become even more 
essential for a number of developing countries 
and it is important that bilateral and 
multilateral flows continue. We welcomed the 
agreement reached at Toronto to ensure an 
adequate level of funding through the life of the 
Sixth Replenishment of the International 
Development Association (IDAVI).
103.	The tendency to turn inward economically 
is also exerting strain on the multilateral 
trading system. Protectionist sentiment arising 
from economic disloca¬tion is difficult for all 
Governments to deal with, my own included. But it 
is absolutely essential that we manage these 
pressures collectively to avoid under¬mining 
GATT. That organization has been enormously 
beneficial in promoting world economic growth in 
developed and developing countries. Any serious 
weakening of GATT through beggar-thy-neighbour 
policies would have the ultimate effect of making 
beggars of us all. GATT can and should be 
strengthened.
104.	Canada will chair the 1982 annual session 
of the GATT Contracting Parties, which will be 
held at the ministerial level in November. We 
regard this session as a significant test of our 
collective determination to manage an 
interdependent system.
105.	Intense preoccupation with domestic 
economic concerns also confounds our attempts to 
persevere with development assistance programmes. 
What should be our response to the inescapability 
of shrinking resources? How do we face the 
difficulties in generating increased development 
assistance flows?
106.	We should all—national donors and 
multilateral agencies alike—rationalize 
deployment of available resources for maximum 
possible effect. The best results can be obtained 
from this process of com¬pulsory selectivity only 
if donors focus on areas of special national 
expertise and resources. Canada has chosen to 
concentrate its efforts in three particular areas 
which draw upon considerable national experience. 
These are the food and agricultural area, energy, 
specifically petroleum exploration, and human 
resources.

107.	Another response to shrinking resources 
should be to make full and timely use of every 
opportunity for enhanced co operation. In this 
connection, I am disappointed with the lack of 
progress made on global negotiations since the 
Versailles Economic Summit in June. Canada 
believes that the text of a compromise resolution 
worked out at Versailles represented a 
significant step in the effort to find a formula 
for launching global negotiations. I regret that 
it has not been possible to find a basis for real 
negotiations.
108.	Economic problems are all the more vexing 
and potentially dangerous because they are bound 
up with serious political instability. Political 
instability pro¬duces consequences extending far 
beyond the imme¬diate region in which conflict 
has erupted. In a shrinking world local 
vulnerabilities and tragedies become the common 
concern of us all.
109.	We have witnessed the long agony of 
Lebanon and, but 10 days ago, the horror of the 
massacre of Palestinians. These terrible events 
show us in stark fashion the price that must be 
paid when one strives to resolve political 
problems by military means, when disputes among 
nations and peoples and political factions 
replace negotiations, when one misuses or 
disregards the instruments that the international 
com¬munity has established to settle disputes and 
prevent human suffering.
110.	I should like to stress that Canada 
staunchly supports the sovereignty, independence 
and territorial integrity of Lebanon, and that it 
endorses the Security Council resolutions which 
call for Israel's withdrawal from west Beirut and 
the whole of Lebanon. No foreign force should 
remain in that country without the full consent 
of the Lebanese Government; otherwise that 
ravaged country will never know stability again.
111.	Equally important, efforts must be 
intensified now to grapple with the problems at 
the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict. More than 
ever the tragic events of the last few months 
illustrate the need for a just and permanent 
solution which assures the legitimate rights of 
the Palestinian people, including their right to 
a homeland in the West Bank and Gaza, and the 
right of Israel to exist in security and peace. 
Important proposals for such a solution have 
recently been made. The United States proposals 
of 1 Sep¬tember in particular offer opportunities 
for progress which should vigorously be pursued.
112.	Other arenas of conflict continue to 
contribute to the generally high level of 
international tension. Events in Poland remain an 
object of our particular attention, not only 
because of concern for the basic rights and 
freedoms of the Polish people but also because of 
serious implications for stability in the heart 
of Europe.
113.	In Afghanistan and Cambodia we witness 
agonizing, protracted and deplorable military 
occupa¬tions which are in sharp contradiction 
with the aims and ideals of the Organization and 
the Charter. The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan 
and the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia 
continue to violate the sovereignty of their 
victims and to ignore resolutions adopted by the 
General Assembly. Once again this year draft 
resolutions are before the Assembly on 
Afghanistan and Cambodia. I urge all Member 
States to support these draft resolutions.
114.	The Korean peninsula has long been an 
area of tension and concern. We are encouraged 
however by the proposals made in January this 
year by the President of the Republic of Korea 
seeking dialogue and reconciliation, without 
conditions, and we hope for the greater 
integration of the peninsula into the 
inter¬national community.
115.	The extent to which local or regional 
conflicts draw their energy from mutually 
antagonistic ideo¬logical systems is also cause 
for considerable concern. In recent years the 
breakdown of detente and an increasing anxiety 
over the unpredictability of events have fuelled 
public fears of nuclear war. Our peoples fear 
that everything is at risk: the economic and 
technological systems which sustain us, the 
political and social systems which underpin them 
and the very biosphere which permits the 
existence of life itself.
116.	The world had high hopes for the second 
special session of the General Assembly on 
disarmament. When the session ended and no final 
agreement on a comprehensive programme of 
disarmament had been reached, there was much 
disappointment and frustra¬tion. However, a 
disservice is done to the special session and to 
the United Nations as an institution if it is 
simply dismissed as a failure. Of course the 
results were disappointing, but then the 
expectations of many were probably 
unrealistically high given the prevailing 
international climate. Moreover, in this climate 
it is essential that the campaign for nuclear 
disarmament be waged at the negotiating table. My 
country strongly supports the present 
negotiations in Geneva to limit and reduce the 
level of nuclear arms.
117.	Canada has chosen to contribute to the 
arms control and disarmament process by 
concentrating on the vital issue of verification. 
We are doing this through participating in the 
international seismic data exchange and by 
substantially increasing research in 
verification. I would appeal to other Member 
States to consider how their particular 
circumstances and resources might be drawn upon 
to contribute to the arms control process. It is 
basically the same question as with development: 
given the need for selectivity, what can you 
contribute?
118.	I have evoked today a set of perplexing 
and interrelated economic and political problems. 
What is the United Nations capacity to respond to 
these? The question is an urgent one, because the 
United Nations and the specialized agencies 
address virtually the entire range of human 
concerns.
119.	Within the United Nations, crisis 
management capacity has been called seriously 
into question by divisions within the Security 
Council, by erosion of the constitutional 
division of authority between the Security 
Council and the General Assembly and by a cycle 
of ineffectual resolutions. We have seen an 
increasing tendency to introduce extraneous 
polemical issues in the specialized agencies, 
with adiminution of their effectiveness and 
credibility. Official spokes¬men of key States 
Members of the United Nations have expressed 
scepticism regarding the Organization. To counter 
attacks on the United Nations from within and 
without we must more closely bind our policies 
and our behaviour to the principles expressed in 
the Charter. We must also vigorously reaffirm the 
singular contribution that the United Nations has 
made to the development of international law. As 
the Secretary-General explained at length and 
with eloquence in a statement delivered last 
month in Montreal, the United Nations plays a 
unique and absolutely essential role in the 
promotion of the rule of law. It is only the 
United Nations, with its virtually global scope, 
which has the capacity to play that role.
120.	This year the Third United Nations 
Conference on the Law of the Sea succeeded in 
producing a profound achievement: a comprehensive 
constitution for the oceans of the world. The 
Conference could not have produced such a 
comprehensive convention without the active 
support and participation of all nations during 
the long years of negotiation. We deeply regret 
that the Conference was not able to adopt the 
text of the Convention by consensus. No State can 
remain aloof from the regime, and we must not be 
swayed by any attempt to undermine it.
121.	The United Nations has succeeded in 
making human rights violations a legitimate 
subject of interna¬tional scrutiny and it is 
significant that the Secretary- General has 
identified human rights promotion as a priority 
area. Canada will support the Secretary- General 
in these efforts. Effective procedures must be 
worked out to deal with flagrant violations of 
human rights.
122.	A role of critical importance for the 
United Nations is the peaceful resolution of 
disputes. How¬ever maligned the Organization may 
be concerning its efforts to resolve disputes, it 
can achieve notable successes. In Namibia, the 
United Nations has worked cut a balanced 
settlement plan which should bring Namibia to 
independence peacefully, and has obtained for 
that plan general acceptance. The substantial 
progress that has been made must be attributed in 
part to the dedication and constructive approach 
of the front-line States and the South West 
Africa People's Organization [SW/1PO]. We hope 
that remaining problems will be quickly resolved.
123.	The appointment of a new 
Secretary-General has come at a time when the 
United Nations is facing unprecedented problems 
and when the need for insti¬tutional reform has 
become obvious. In his first report on the work 
of the Organization, the Secretary- General has 
addressed this need in direct and specific terms. 
He has put forward several innovative 
sugges¬tions, in particular directed at a more 
effective Security Council. He has himself 
undertaken to play a more direct role in bringing 
urgent matters before the Council. These specific 
proposals and the Secre¬tary-General's commitment 
to administrative stream¬lining are very welcome 
and should be encouraged. Pragmatic reforms must 
be made or the United Nations will lose its 
validity as a forum for interna¬tional 
negotiations, not only for the promotion of peace 
and security but also for the shaping of our, 
economic future.
124.	The aims of the institutions we have 
invented are under considerable and potentially 
crippling strain. We must rededicate these 
institutions and the driving force of our 
determination must be a sense of shared 
vulnerability.
125.	The present crisis demands intelligence 
and will. Intelligence must lead us to a more 
profound
Understanding of political and economic forces; 
our will must reside in commitment to those 
national con¬cessions dictated by our mutual 
dependency. We cannot, must not, allow mutual 
antagonisms or self- absorption to divert our 
attention from the full range of difficulties 
which we face, and which we must face together.
I begin by paying a tribute to the new 
Secretary-General, who has brought great 
distinction to the office during his brief 
tenure. Dag Hammarskjold once told the General 
Assembly that whichever word one chooses 
independence, impartiality, objectivity—they all 
describe essential aspects of what, without 
exception, must be in the attitude of the 
Secretary-General . Javier Perez de CueBar, a man 
of the third world, and, I am proud to note, of 
the New World as well, has already demonstrated 
his strict adherence to this most exacting 
standard. In so doing, he has earned the esteem 
of my Government and the gratitude of all who 
believe in the purposes of the Charter.
197.	I also congratulate Mr. Hollai of Hungary 
upon his election as President of the 
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
198.	As I stand here today I cannot help but 
reflect on my relation to this city and to this 
Hall. I was born about four miles from here. I 
was reared and educated not far away, just across 
the Hudson River, and I took a tour through this 
building just after it opened in 1952, marveling 
at the reality of a temple erected in the hope, 
at least, of abolishing war. ,
199.	When I took that tour back in the early 
1950s, there was great public interest in what 
was called the Meditation Room. I understand the 
room is still here. But in the years since then 
this institution has become more famous for talk 
than for meditation. This Hall has heard great 
ideas eloquently expressed. It has also heard 
double-talk, platitudes and ringing protestations 
of innocence—all too often aimed at camouflaging 
outrageous and inhuman acts.
200.	But we must not ridicule words. I believe 
that the greatest advance in human history was 
not the wheel, the use of electricity, or the 
internal combustion engine. Indispensable to 
progress as these have been, our most remarkable 
achievement was the slow, clumsy but triumphant 
creation of language. It was words that released 
our ancestors from the prison of the solitary. 
Words gave us the means to transmit to our 
children and the future the crowning jewel of 
human existence: knowledge. The Code of 
Ham¬murabi, the Bible, the Analects of Confucius, 
the teachings of the Buddha, the Koran, the 
insights of Shakespeare, the creed of Mahatma 
Gandhi or Martin Luther King—all these were 
arrangements of words.
201.	Is it not profoundly revealing that the 
first victims of tyrants are words? No people 
better know the meaning of freedom than those who 
have been arrested or beaten or imprisoned or 
exiled because of what they said. A single man 
speaking out—a Lech Walesa, for example—is more 
dangerous than an armored division.
202.	All of us here, whether we arrived after 
a short one-hour flight, as I did, or came from 
the other side of the globe, as many others of 
those present did, enter this auditorium for one 
main purpose—to talk about what our Governments 
see as the problems ahead and how they should be 
solved. On one point at least we can all 
agree—the problems are many and difficult. I 
shall not try, in the minutes allotted me, to 
deal with each, or even most, of these issues in 
detail. Instead, I want to give the Assembly some 
sense of the principles and general approach that 
the United States will take toward our common 
problems.
203.	Americans are, by history and by 
inclination, a practical and pragmatic people, 
yet a people with a vision. It is the 
vision—usually simple and sometimes naive—that 
has so often led us to dare and to achieve. 
President Reagan's approach to foreign policy is 
grounded squarely on standards drawn from the 
pragmatic American experience. As de Tocqueville 
pointed out,  To achieve its objective, America 
relies on personal interest, and gives full reign 
to the strength and reason of the individual. 
That is as true now as when it was said 150 years 
ago. Our principal instru¬ment, now as then, is 
freedom. Our adversaries are the oppressors, the 
totalitarian, the tacticians of fear and pressure.
204.	On this foundation, President Reagan's 
ideas and the structure of his foreign policy are 
so straight-forward that those of us enmeshed in 
day-to-day details may easily lose sight of them. 
The President never does, he consistently brings 
us back to funda¬mentals. Today I will talk about 
those fundamentals. They consist of four ideas 
that guide our actions: we will start from 
realism; we will act from strength, both in power 
and in purpose; we will stress the indispensable 
need to generate consent, build agree¬ments and 
negotiate on key issues, and we will conduct 
ourselves in the belief that progress is 
possible, even though the road to achievement is 
long and hard.
205.	If we are to change the world, we must 
first understand it. We must face reality, with 
all its anguish and all its opportunities. Our 
era needs those who, as
Pericles said, have the clearest vision of what 
is before them, glory and danger alike, and 
notwithstanding that, go out to meet it.
206.	Reality is not an illusion or a sleight 
of hand, though many would have us believe 
otherwise. The enormous, grinding machinery of 
Soviet propaganda daily seeks to distort reality, 
to bend truth for its own purposes. Our world is 
occupied by far too many Governments which seek 
to conceal truth from their own people. They wish 
to imprison reality by con¬trolling what can be 
read or spoken or heard. They would have us 
believe that black is white and up is down.
207.	Much of present-day reality is 
unpleasant. To describe conditions as we see them 
as I do today and as President Reagan has over 
the course of his presidency, is not to seek 
confrontation—far from it. Our purpose is to 
avoid misunderstanding and to create the 
necessary pre-conditions for change.
208.	So, when we see aggression, we will call 
it aggression. When we see subversion, we will 
call it subversion. When we see repression, we 
will call it repression.
209.	The events in Poland, for example, cannot 
be ignored or explained away. The Polish people 
want to be their own master. Years of systematic 
tyranny could not repress this desire; and nor 
will martial law. But in Poland today truth must 
hide in comers.
210.	Nor can we simply turn our heads and look 
the other way as Soviet divisions brutalize an 
entire population in Afghanistan. The resistance 
of the Afghan people is a valiant saga of our 
times. We demean that valour if we do not 
recognize its source.
211.	And Soviet surrogates intervene in many 
coun¬tries, creating a new era of colonialism at 
the moment in history when peoples around the 
globe had lifted that burden from their backs.
212.	Nor will we shy away from speaking of 
other problems affecting the free and the 
developing worlds. Much of the developing world 
is threatened by a crisis of confidence in 
financial institutions and the stultifying 
effects of State-controlled economies. The 
naturally vibrant economies of many Western 
nations and trade between the world's major 
trading partners are threatened by recession and 
rising protectionism. The great alliances that 
shore up world stability and growth—our 
hemispheric partnership, NATO—and the Western and 
Japanese industrial democracies are challenged by 
new as well as chronic strains.
213.	Finally, the shadow of war still darkens 
the future of us all. There is no ultimate safety 
in a nuclear balance of terror constantly 
contested. There is no peace of mind at a time 
when increasing numbers of nations appear willing 
to launch their armies into battle for causes 
which seem local but have ramifica¬tions for 
regional and even global harmony.
214.	The list of troubles is long, the danger 
of despair great. But there is another side to 
the present reality; it is a reality of hope. We 
are living in a fantastic time of opportunity.
215.	Historians in the future will surely 
marvel at the achievements of human beings in the 
last half of this century. We have expanded the 
frontiers of thought—in science, in biology, in 
engineering, in painting and music and 
mathematics, in technology and architecture—far 
beyond the point anyone could have dared predict, 
much less hope for. We know much today about the 
oceans and forests and the geological strata that 
lock in the story of our past. We have more 
knowledge about a baby, or the brain, than was 
accumulated in 10 millennia before our time. We 
are learning to produce food for all of us; we 
are no longer helpless before the threat of 
disease; we explore our universe as a matter of 
course. We are confronting the nature of Nature 
herself. The oppor¬tunities are grand. This, too, 
is a clear reality.
216.	Thus realism shows us a world deeply 
troubled, yet with reason for hope. There is one 
necessary condition: the only way we can enhance 
and amplify the human potential is by preserving, 
defending and extending those most precious of 
conditions—freedom and peace.
217.	America's yearning for peace does not 
lead us to be hesitant in developing our strength 
or in using it when necessary. Indeed, clarity 
about the magnitude of the problems we face leads 
inevitably to a realistic appreciation of the 
importance of American strength. The strength of 
the free world imposes restraint, invites 
accommodation and reassures those who would share 
in the creative work that is the wonderful 
consequence of liberty.
218.	Strength means military forces to ensure 
that no other nation can threaten us, our 
interests or our friends. But when I speak of 
strength I do not mean military power alone. To 
Americans, strength derives as well from a solid 
economic base and social vitality at home and 
with our partners. And, most funda¬mentally, the 
true wellspring of strength lies in America's 
moral commitment.
219.	The bulwark of America's strength is 
military power for peace. The American people 
have never accepted weakness, or hesitancy or 
abdication. We will not put our destiny into the 
hands of the ruthless. Americans today are 
emphatically united on the neces¬sity of a strong 
defense. This year's defense budget will ensure 
that the United States will help its friends and 
allies defend themselves—to make sure that peace 
is seen clearly by all to be the only feasible 
course in world affairs.
220.	Along with military readiness and 
capability must come the willingness to employ it 
in the cause of peace, justice and security. 
Today in Beirut the United States 
Marines—together with our allies, Italy and 
France—are helping the Lebanese Government und 
armed forces ensure the safety of the peoples of 
that tormented capital. I regret to report that I 
have just learned that one American Marine died 
and several were injured today in a mine 
explosion at the Beirut airport. Our marines 
represent an extension of American power not for 
war but to secure the peace. They are there to 
speed the moment when all foreign forces depart 
from Lebanon. There must be an early agreement on 
a timetable for the full application of Lebanon's 
independence, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. Lebanon deserves the world's help—to 
secure peace and to rebuild a thriving society.
221.	America will continue to use its strength 
with prudence, firmness and balance. We intend to 
command the respect of adversaries and to deserve 
the confidence of allies and partners.
222.	The engine of America's strength is a sound economy.
223.	In a time of recession, industrialized 
and less developed nations alike are bedeviled by 
excessive inflation, restricted markets, unused 
capacity, stagnating trade, growing pressure for 
protectionism and the most potent enemy of 
expansion—pervasive uncertainty.
224.	The United States with its vast human and 
scientific resources can survive an era of 
economic strife and decay. But our moral 
commitment and our self-interest require us to 
use our technological and productive abilities to 
build lasting prosperity at home and to 
contribute to a sound economic situation abroad.
225.	President Reagan has instituted a bold 
pro¬gram to get the American economy moving. Our 
rate of inflation is down markedly, and we will 
keep it down. That will add stability to the 
value of the dollar and give greater confidence 
to international financial markets.
226.	The recent drop in United States interest 
rates will stimulate new investments within and 
beyond our shores. Conservation through market pricing 
of energy has reduced United States demand for 
world energy supplies. We are putting the 
recession behind us. A growing and open American 
economy will provide new markets for goods and 
services produced elsewhere, and new 
opportunities for foreign invest¬ments. Just as 
we have a stake in world-wide recovery, others 
will prosper as our recovery develops.
227.	For wider prosperity to take hold, we 
must co¬operatively attend to these international 
issues. The lure of protectionist trade policies 
must be resisted everywhere—here in the United 
States and all over the world—whether in the form 
of overt import restrictions and export subsidies 
or by more subtle domestic pro¬grammes. These can 
only distort world trade and impair growth 
everywhere. Let us determine to make the November 
ministerial meeting of GATT a time to stem these 
protectionist pressures and to reinvigorate 
positive efforts for a more open trading system.
228.	The implications of the external debt of 
many nations must be understood. Immediate debt 
problems are manageable if we use good sense and 
avoid destabilizing actions. But the magnitude of 
external debt will almost inevitably reduce 
resources available for future lending for 
development purposes. Economic adjustment is 
imperative. IMF can provide critical help and 
guidance in any country's efforts to smooth the 
adjustment process. The new borrowing 
arrange¬ment proposed by the United States can be 
crucial to this effort.	'
229.	And the necessity of reducing government 
interference in the market must be recognized. Of 
course every nation has the right to organize 
society as its inhabitants wish, but economic 
facts cannot be ignored. Those facts clearly 
demonstrate that the world's command economies 
have failed abysmally to meet the needs of their 
peoples. The newly pros¬perous industrialized 
nations are those with the most free and open 
markets.
230.	The bedrock of our strength is our moral 
and spiritual character. The sources of true 
strength lie deeper than economic or military 
power. They lie in the dedication of a free 
people which knows its responsibility. America's 
institutions are those of freedom accessible to 
every person and of govern¬ment as the 
accountable servant of the people. Equal 
opportunity, due process of law, open trial by 
jury, freedom of belief, speech and assembly, our 
Bill of Rights, our guarantees of liberty and 
limited govern¬ment were hammered out in 
centuries of ordeal. Because we care about these 
human values for ourselves so must we then be 
concerned, and legiti¬mately so, with abuses of 
freedom, justice and humanitarian principles 
beyond our borders. This is why we will speak and 
act for prisoners of con¬science, against 
terrorism and against the brutal silencing of the 
Soviet Helsinki Watch Committee. This is why we 
are anxious to participate in periodic reviews of 
the human rights performance of ourselves as well 
as of others. We welcome scrutiny of our own 
system. We are not perfect and we know it, but we 
have nothing to hide.
231.	Our belief in liberty guides our policies 
here in' the United Nations as elsewhere. 
Therefore in this forum the United States will 
continue to insist upon fairness, balance and 
truth. We take the debate on human rights 
seriously. We insist upon honesty in the use of 
language; we will point out inconsistencies, 
double standards and lies. We will not compromise 
our commitment to truth.
232.	The world has work to do for the 
realists, the pragmatists and the free. With a 
clear understanding of the troubled circumstances 
of the hour and with a strengthened ability to 
act, we need as well the vision to see beyond the 
immediate present.
233.	All of us here represent nations which 
must understand and accept the imperative of fair 
engage¬ment on the issues before us and, beyond 
that, of common effort towards shared goals. 
Whether we are seeking to bring peace to regional 
conflict or a reso¬lution of commercial 
differences, the time of imposed solutions has 
passed. Conquest, pressure, acqui¬escence under 
duress was common in decades not long past—but 
not today. Not everybody who wants his concern 
addressed will find us automatically receptive. 
But when negotiations are in order America is 
prepared to go to work on the global agenda and 
to do so in a way that all may emerge better off 
and more secure than before.
234.	We manage our problems more intelligently 
and with greater mutual understanding when we can 
bring ourselves to recognize these problems as 
expressions of mankind's basic dilemma. We are 
seldom confronted with simple issues of right and 
wrong, between good and evil. Only those who do 
not bear the direct burden of responsibility for 
decision and action can indulge themselves in the 
denial of that reality. The task of statesmanship 
is to mediate between two—or several— causes, 
each of which often has a legitimate claim.
235.	It is on this foundation that the United 
States stands ready to try to solve the problems 
of our time —to overcome chaos, deprivation and 
the heightened dangers of an era in which ideas 
and cultures too often tend to clash and 
technologies threaten to out¬pace our 
institutions of control.
236.	We are engaged in negotiations and 
efforts to find answers to issues affecting every 
part of the globe and every aspect of our lives 
upon it. Let me take up just two of these with 
you.
237.	The agony of the Middle East now exceeds 
the ability of news bulletins or speeches to 
express: it is a searing wound on our 
consciousness. The region is in constant ferment. 
Unrest flares into violence, terror, insurrection 
and civil strife. War follows war. It is clear to 
everyone in this Hall that international peace, 
security and co-operative progress cannot be 
truly achieved until this terrible regional 
conflict is settled.
238.	AM of us have witnessed in the past 
several months a graphic reminder of the need for 
practical peace negotiations in the Middle East. 
Of the nations in the world which need and 
deserve peace, Israel surely holds a pre-eminent 
place. Of the peoples of the world who need and 
deserve a place with which they can truly 
identify, the Palestinian claim is undeniable.
239.	But Israel can have permanent peace only 
in a context in which the Palestinian people also 
realize their legitimate rights. Similarly, the 
Palestinian people will be able to achieve their 
legitimate rights only in a context which gives 
to Israel what it so clearly has a right to 
demand: to exist, and to exist in peace and 
security.
240.	This most complex of international 
conflicts cannot be resolved by force: neither 
the might of armies nor the violence of 
terrorists can succeed in imposing the will of 
the strong upon the weak. Nor can it be settled 
simply by the rhetoric of even the most carefully 
worded document. It can be resolved only through 
the give and take of direct negotiations, leading 
to the establishment of practical arrangements on 
the ground. In other words, it can be resolved 
only through hard work. For those who believe 
that there is no contradiction between permanent 
peace for Israel and the legitimate rights of the 
Palestinian people—and fbr those who believe that 
both are essential for peace and that neither can 
be achieved without the other—the task can truly 
be a labour of love.
241.	On 1 September President Reagan 
challenged the parties to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict to make a fresh start on the road to 
peace in the Middle East. The Camp David 
agreements, resting squarely on Security Council 
resolution 242 (1967), with its formula of peace 
for territory, remain available to those who 
would accept the challenge to make this journey 
with us. The road will not be easy, but in his 
statement President Reagan made a number of 
proposals which, for those who are willing to 
join the effort, make the journey safer and 
easier.
242.	I call on all concerned to accept 
President Reagan's challenge and hasten the 
realization of true peace in the Middle East,
243.	In addition to the imperative need to 
resolve regional problems, there is an equally 
significant global imperative: to halt, and 
reverse, the global arms build¬up. As an 
American, I am aware that arms control and 
disarmament are a special responsibility of the 
world's most powerful nations, the United States 
and the Soviet Union. And as an American, I can 
report that we are fulfilling our responsibility 
to seek to limit and reduce conventional and 
nuclear arms to the lowest possible levels.
244.	With this goal in mind, President Reagan 
has initiated a comprehensive program for 
negotiated arms reductions. In Central Europe, 
the most heavily armed region on this planet, the 
Western allies are seeking substantial reductions 
in troops of NATO and the Warsaw Pact to equal 
levels. To achieve this goal, we have recently 
introduced a new proposal designed to revitalize 
the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, 
Armaments and Associated Measures in Central 
Europe.
245.	In the area of strategic arms, the United 
States has also taken the initiative by calling 
for a one-third reduction in the number of 
nuclear warheads that American and Soviet 
ballistic missiles can deliver. And in the talks 
in Geneva on intermediate-range nuclear forces, 
the United States has gone even further, by 
asking the Soviet Union to agree to a bold 
proposal for eliminating an entire category of 
weapons from the arsenals of the two sides.
246.	But important as these negotiations are, 
the problems of arms controls cannot be left to 
the two super-Powers. The threat of nuclear 
proliferation extends to every region in the 
world and demands the attention and energy of 
every Government. This is not solely, or even 
primarily, a concern of the super¬ powers. The 
non-nuclear countries will not be safer if 
nuclear intimidation is added to already deadly 
regional conflicts. The developing nations will 
not be more prosperous if scarce resources and 
scientific talent are diverted to nuclear weapons 
and delivery systems.
247.	Unfortunately, as the task becomes more 
im¬portant it also becomes more difficult. 
Greater quantities of dangerous materials are 
produced and new suppliers emerge who lack a 
clear commitment to non-proliferation. But the 
technology that helped to create the problems can 
supply answers as well. Vigorous action to 
strengthen the barriers to aggres¬sion and to 
resolve disputes peacefully can remove the 
insecurities that are the root of the problem. 
The United States, for its part, will work to 
tighten export controls; to promote broader 
acceptance of safeguards; to urge meaningful 
actions when agreements are violated; and to 
strengthen IAEA. As our action last week in 
Vienna should make clear, we will not accept 
attempts to politicize—and therefore emasculate— 
such vital institutions.
248.	Perhaps the most common phrase spoken by 
the American people in our more than two 
centuries of national life has been you can't 
stop progress . Our people have always been 
imbued with the conviction that the future of a 
free people would be good. America continues to 
offer that vision to the world. With that vision, 
and with the freedom to act creatively, there is 
nothing that people of good will need fear.
249.	I am not here to assert, however, that 
the way is easy, or quick, or that the future is 
bound to be bright. There is a poem by Carl 
Sandburg in which a traveler asks the Sphinx to 
speak and reveal the distilled wisdom of all the 
ages. The Sphinx does speak. Its words are: 
Don't expect too much . That is good counsel for 
ail of us here. It does not mean that great 
accomplishments are beyond our reach. We can help 
shape more constructive international rela¬tions 
and give our children a better chance at life. It 
does mean, however, that risk, pain, expense, and 
above all endurance are needed to bring these 
achieve¬ments into our grasp.
250.	We must recognize the complex and vexing 
character of this world. We should not indulge 
our¬selves in fantasies of perfection of 
unfulfillable plans, or solutions gained by 
pressure. It is the responsibility of leaders not 
to feed the growing appetite for easy promises 
and grand assurances. The plain truth is this: we 
face the prospect of all too few decisive or 
dramatic breakthroughs; we face the necessity of 
dedicatingour energies and creativity to a 
protracted struggle towards eventual success.
251.	That is the approach of my country, 
because we see not only the necessity but the 
possibility, of making important progress on a 
broad front. For example: despite deep-seated 
differences between us and the Soviet Union, both 
sides are now at work in a serious, businesslike 
effort at arms control; Presi¬dent Reagan has 
issued an important call for an inter¬national 
conference on military expenditure. The 
achievement of a common system for accounting and 
reporting is the prerequisite for subsequent 
agreement to limits or curtail defense budgets. 
The Caribbean Basin Initiative establishes the 
crucial bond between economic development and 
economic freedom. It can be a model for fair and 
productive co-operation between economies vastly 
different in size and character; and the 
diplomatic way is open to build stability and 
progress in southern Africa through inde¬pendence 
for Namibia under internationally accept-able 
terms.
252.	Realism and a readiness to work long and 
hard for fair and freely agreed solutions—that is 
our recipe for optimism. That is the message and 
the offer which my Government brings to the 
Assembly today.
253.	I began my remarks here today with an 
informal personal word. May I end in the same 
spirit? We must be determined and confident. We 
must be prepared for trouble, but always 
optimistic. In that way the vast bounties 
produced by the human mind and imagination can be 
shared by all the races and nations we represent 
here in this Hall.
254.	A predecessor of mine as Secretary of 
State, whose portrait hangs in my office, 
conveyed the essence of America's approach to the 
world's dangers and dilemmas. He said we would 
act with  a stout heart and a clear conscience 
and never despair . That is what John Quincy 
Adams said nearly a century and a half ago. I 
give the Assembly my personal pledge today that 
we will continue in that spirit, with that 
determination, and with that confidence in the 
future.
Let me begin by thanking the
Assembly for its very kind and generous welcome and by
noting that, at the opening of this fifty-third session of the
General Assembly, the world has much to celebrate.
Peace has come to Northern Ireland after 29 long years.
Bosnia has just held its freest elections ever. The United
Nations is actively mediating crises before they explode
into war, all around the world. And today more people
determine their own destiny than at any previous moment
in history.
We celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights with those rights more
widely embraced than ever before. On every continent
people are leading lives of integrity and self-respect, and
a great deal of the credit for that belongs to the United
Nations.
Still, as every person in this Hall knows, the promise
of our time is attended by perils. Global economic turmoil
today threatens to undermine confidence in free markets
and democracy. Those of us who benefit particularly from
this economy have a special responsibility to do more to
minimize the turmoil and extend the benefits of global
markets to all citizens. And the United States is
determined to do that.
We still are bedevilled by ethnic, racial, religious
and tribal hatreds, by the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, by the almost frantic efforts of too many
States to acquire such weapons.
And, despite all efforts to contain it, terrorism is not
fading away with the end of the twentieth century. It is a
continuing defiance of article 3 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which says
9


“Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of
person.”
Here at the United Nations, at international summits
around the world and on many occasions in the United
States, I have had the opportunity to address this subject in
detail, to describe what we have done, what we are doing
and what we must yet do to combat terror.
Today I would like to talk to the Assembly about why
all nations must put the fight against terrorism at the top of
our agenda. Obviously this is a matter of profound concern
to us. In the last 15 years our citizens have been targeted
over and over again: in Beirut; over Lockerbie; in Saudi
Arabia; at home in Oklahoma City by one of our own
citizens; even here in New York, in one of our most public
buildings; and most recently, on 7 August, in Nairobi and
Dar-es-Salaam, where Americans who devoted their lives
to building bridges between nations — people very much
like all of those present — died in a campaign of hatred
against the United States.
Because we are blessed to be a wealthy nation, with
a powerful military and a worldwide presence active in
promoting peace and security, we are often a target. We
love our country for its dedication to political and religious
freedom, to economic opportunity, to respect for the rights
of the individual. But we know that many people see us as
a symbol of a system and values they reject. And often they
find it expedient to blame us for problems with deep roots
elsewhere.
But we are no threat to any peaceful nation, and we
believe the best way to disprove these claims is to continue
our work for peace and prosperity around the world. For us
to pull back from the world’s trouble spots, to turn our
backs on those taking risks for peace, to weaken our own
opposition to terrorism, would hand the enemies of peace
a victory they must never have.
Still, it is a grave misconception to see terrorism as
only, or even mostly, an American problem. Indeed, it is a
clear and present danger to tolerant and open societies and
innocent people everywhere. No one in this room, nor the
people represented here, is immune. Certainly not the
people of Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam. For every American
killed there, roughly 20 Africans were murdered and 500
more injured — innocent people going about their business
on a busy morning.
Not the people of Omagh, in Northern Ireland, where
the wounded and killed were Catholics and Protestants
alike — mostly children and women, two of them
pregnant — people out shopping together when their
future was snuffed out by a fringe group clinging to the
past.
Not the people of Japan, who were poisoned by sarin
gas in the Tokyo subway.
Not the people of Argentina, who died when a car
bomb destroyed a Jewish community centre in Buenos
Aires.
Not the people of Kashmir and Sri Lanka, killed by
ancient animosities that cry out for resolution.
Not the Palestinians and Israelis, who still die year
after year, for all their progress towards peace.
Not the people of Algeria, enduring a nightmare of
unfathomable terror with still no end in sight.
Not the people of Egypt, who nearly lost a second
President to assassination.
Not the people of Turkey, Colombia, Albania,
Russia, Iran, Indonesia and countless other nations where
innocent people have been victimized by terror.
None of those victims were American. But every
one was a son or daughter, a husband or wife, a father or
mother — a human life extinguished by someone else’s
hatred, leaving a circle of people whose lives will never
be the same.
Terror has become the world’s problem. Some argue,
of course, that the problem is overblown, saying that the
number of deaths from terrorism is comparatively small,
sometimes less than the number of people killed by
lightning in a single year. I believe that misses the point
in several ways. First, terrorism has a new face in the
1990s. Today, terrorists take advantage of greater
openness and the explosion of information and weapons
technology. The new technologies of terror and their
increasing availability, along with the increasing mobility
of terrorists, raise chilling prospects of vulnerability to
chemical, biological and other kinds of attacks, bringing
each of us into the category of possible victim. This is a
threat to all humankind.
Beyond the physical damage of each attack, there is
an even greater residue of psychological damage, hard to
measure but slow to heal. Every bomb, every bomb
10


threat, has an insidious effect on free and open institutions;
the kinds of institutions everyone in this body is working so
hard to build. Each time an innocent man or woman or
child is killed, it makes the future more hazardous for the
rest of us, for each violent act saps the confidence that is so
crucial to peace and prosperity.
In every corner of the world, with the active support
of United Nations agencies, people are struggling to build
better futures based on bonds of trust connecting them with
their fellow citizens and with partners and investors from
around the world. The glimpse of growing prosperity in
Northern Ireland was a crucial factor in the Good Friday
Agreement. But that took confidence, confidence that
cannot be bought in times of violence. We can measure
each attack in the grisly statistics of dead and wounded. But
what are the wounds we cannot measure? In the Middle
East, in Asia, in South America — how many agreements
have been thwarted after bombs blew up? How many
businesses will never be created in places crying out for
investments of time and money? How many talented young
people in countries represented here have turned their backs
on public service? The question is not only how many lives
have been lost in each attack, but how many futures were
lost in their aftermath.
There is no justification for killing innocents.
Ideology, religion and politics, even deprivation and
righteous grievance, do not justify it. We must seek to
understand the roiled waters in which terror occurs. Of
course we must. Often in my own experience I have seen
that where peace is making progress, terror is a desperate
act to turn back the tide of history. The Omagh bombing
came as peace was succeeding in Northern Ireland. In the
Middle East, whenever we get close to another step towards
peace, its enemies respond with terror. We must not let this
stall our momentum. The bridging of ancient hatreds is,
after all, a leap of faith — a break with the past — and
thus a frightening threat to those who cannot let go of their
own hatred. Because they fear the future, in these cases
terrorists seek to blow the peacemakers back into the past.
We must also acknowledge that there are economic
sources of this rage as well. Poverty, inequality and masses
of disenfranchised young people are fertile fields for the
siren call of the terrorists and their claims of advancing
social justice. But deprivation cannot justify destruction; nor
can inequity ever atone for murder. The killing of innocents
is not a social programme.
Nevertheless, our resolute opposition to terrorism does
not mean we can ever be indifferent to the conditions that
foster it. The most recent United Nations Human
Development Report suggests the gulf is widening
between the world’s haves and have-nots. We must work
harder to treat the sources of despair before they turn into
the poison of hatred.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., once wrote that the only
revolutionary is a man who has nothing to lose. We must
show people they have everything to gain by embracing
cooperation and renouncing violence. This is not simply
an American or a Western responsibility; it is the world’s
responsibility. Developing nations have an obligation to
spread new wealth fairly, to create new opportunities, to
build new, open economies. Developed nations have an
obligation to help developing nations stay on the path of
prosperity and to spur global economic growth. A week
ago I outlined ways we can build a stronger international
economy to benefit not only all nations, but all citizens
within them.
Some believe that terrorism’s principal fault line
centres on what they see as an inevitable clash of
civilizations. This is an issue that deserves a lot of debate
in this great Hall. Specifically, many believe there is an
inevitable clash between Western civilization and values
and Islamic civilization and values. I believe this view is
terribly wrong. False prophets may use and abuse any
religion to justify whatever political objectives they
have — even cold-blooded murder. Some may have the
world believe that Almighty God Himself, the merciful,
grants a licence to kill; but that is not our understanding
of Islam.
A quarter of the world’s population is Muslim, from
Africa to the Middle East to Asia and to the United
States, where Islam is one of our fastest growing faiths.
There are over 1,200 mosques and Islamic centres in the
United States, and that number is rapidly increasing. The
6 million Americans who worship there will tell you there
is no inherent clash between Islam and America.
Americans respect and honour Islam.
As I talk to Muslim leaders in my country and
around the world, I see again that we share the same
hopes and aspirations: to live in peace and security, to
provide for our children, to follow the faith of our
choosing, to build a better life than our parents knew and
to pass on brighter possibilities to our children.
Of course, we are not identical. There are important
differences that cross race and culture and religion which
demand understanding and deserve respect. But every
11


river has a crossing place. Even as we struggle here in
America, like the United Nations, to reconcile all
Americans to each other and to find greater unity in our
increasing diversity, we will remain on a course of
friendship with and respect for the Muslim world. We will
continue to look for common values, common interests and
common endeavours. I agree very much with the spirit
expressed by these words of Mohammed: “Rewards for
prayers by people assembled together are twice those for
prayers said at home.”
When it comes to terrorism, there should be no
dividing line between Muslims and Jews, Protestants and
Catholics, Serbs and Albanians, developed societies and
emerging countries. The only dividing line is between those
who practise, support or tolerate terror and those who
understand that it is murder, plain and simple.
If terrorism is at the top of the American agenda and
should be at the top of the world’s agenda, what, then, are
the concrete steps we can take together to protect our
common destiny? What are our common obligations? At
least, I believe, they are these: to give terrorists no support,
no sanctuary, no financial assistance; to bring pressure on
States that do; to act together to step up extradition and
prosecution; to sign the global anti-terror conventions; to
strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention and enforce
the Chemical Weapons Convention; to promote stronger
domestic laws and control the manufacture and export of
explosives; to raise international standards for airport
security; to combat the conditions that spread violence and
despair.
We are working to do our part. Our intelligence and
law enforcement communities are tracking terrorist
networks in cooperation with other Governments. Some of
those we believe responsible for the recent bombing of our
embassies have been brought to justice. Early this week I
will ask our Congress to provide emergency funding to
repair our embassies, to improve security, to expand the
worldwide fight against terrorism and to help our friends in
Kenya and Tanzania with the wounds they have suffered.
But no matter how much each of us does alone, our
progress will be limited without our common efforts.
We will also do our part to address the sources of
despair and alienation through the Agency for International
Development in Africa, in Asia, in Latin America, in
Eastern Europe, in Haiti and elsewhere. We will continue
our strong support for the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the World Bank and the World
Food Programme. We also recognize the critical role
these agencies play and the importance of all countries,
including the United States, in paying their fair share.
In closing, let me urge all of us to think in new
terms on terrorism, to see it not as a clash of cultures, or
political action by other means, or a divine calling, but as
a clash between the forces of the past and the forces of
the future, between those who tear down and those who
build up, between hope and fear, between chaos and
community.
The fight will not be easy. But every nation will be
strengthened in joining it, in working to give real meaning
to the words of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights we signed 50 years ago. It is very, very important
that we do this together.
Eleanor Roosevelt was one of the authors of the
Universal Declaration. She said, in one of her many
speeches in support of the United Nations when it was
just beginning,
“All agreements and all peace are built on
confidence. You cannot have peace and you cannot
get on with other people in the world unless you
have confidence in them.”
It is not necessary that we solve all the world’s
problems to have confidence in one another. It is not
necessary that we agree on all the world’s issues to have
confidence in one another. It is not even necessary that
we understand every single difference among us to have
confidence in one another. But it is necessary that we
affirm our belief in the primacy of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and therefore that together
we say that terror is not a way to tomorrow. It is only a
throwback to yesterday, and together, together we can
meet it and overcome its threats, its injuries and its fears
with confidence.









Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General
Assembly. With your experience and dedication to the
goals of this Organization, you will guide us wisely and
effectively in our work this year.
And important work it is, for as the century draws
to a close, our security is more precarious than ever. The
spectrum of threats is wide and growing. Traditional
dangers persist, including the proliferation of weapons.
But new threats — terrorism, crime and drugs — arise
from a world in which the face of conflict has changed.
Economic and social insecurity for the majority of our
global population is on the rise. Increasingly, it is the
well-being of individuals that is directly at stake.
(spoke in French)
There is an urgent need for solutions. The
interdependence of all of our lives is unprecedented. It is
essential for us to work together to confront these
challenges. This means working through a vibrant United
Nations. For Canada, the universal values set out in the
Charter have acted as our moral compass in setting our
global agenda. The United Nations system serves as the
instrument in achieving our goals.
(spoke in English)
At the same time we recognize that the United
Nations faces its own worries, and it, too, must change.
But a strong, reinvigorated United Nations is still the best
foundation for the future. As the contours of that future
emerge, there is reason for hope. While old realities of
power persist, a new system based on humanitarian
standards, practices and law based upon needs and human
security is beginning to show through.
Perhaps this new reality can best be seen in the
common effort to eliminate anti-personnel landmines. The
Secretary-General has hailed the adoption of the Ottawa
Convention as an unprecedented achievement — one
accomplished through a unique partnership of non-
governmental organizations, Member States and
international groups working together to eliminate a
weapons system that victimizes the innocent.
23


Last week, Burkina Faso deposited the fortieth
ratification of the treaty, thereby crossing the threshold
needed to bring the treaty into force. This treaty, which has
already attracted 130 signatories and 41 ratifications, will
become part of the international legal framework as of 1
March next year. We welcome the offer by Mozambique to
host the first meeting of the States parties to the
Convention. We continue to urge those who have not done
so to sign and ratify the Convention and join in this
international endeavour.
But entry into force is just the first important step in
bringing the treaty to life. Now we have to meet the
treaty?s goals. An effective coalition for action must work
together in this next phase to take the mines out of the
ground and to help the victims. The United Nations,
through its mine action service, will mobilize and
coordinate the efforts of the international community.
At the signing of the treaty on landmines in Ottawa
last December, countries pledged $0.5 billion for mine
action. My own Government has allocated $100 million as
Canada?s contribution to rid the world of these very cruel
weapons. We have already put the money to work in some
of the most severely affected States, with projects in
Mozambique, Cambodia, Bosnia and Central America. Now
we must put everyone?s resources to work.
Landmines are not the only weapons that take a tragic,
disproportionate toll on civilian populations. Small arms
and light military weapons — cheap and easy to transport,
smuggle or hide — have become the tools of choice for
smugglers, terrorists and criminals.
The challenges arising from the proliferation and
widespread abuse of small arms and light weapons are
complex. But the impact on all of us, especially the most
vulnerable, is direct and devastating. Eighty per cent of the
victims are women and children. There are no easy
solutions and no shortcuts. We cannot, however, afford to
shrink from facing such a pervasive threat to our security.
In Canada we pursue a three-pronged approach, dealing
with the legal trade, illicit trafficking and peace-building
challenges of small-arms proliferation. We hope, by
working with others in the United Nations, to see the use
of this terrible weapon come to an end.
Illegal drug-trafficking also threatens our peoples?
security. The drug trade affects governance, undermines
human rights and promotes cross-border conflicts. That is
why Canada has proposed a Foreign Ministers? dialogue
group in the Americas. We hope that this will be a forum
which can provide guidance and generate ideas to help us
curtail the collateral impact of the drug trade on
Governments and on society. These and other emerging
threats to our security, including terrorism, crime and
environmental degradation, affect every one of us but are
beyond the reach of any of us alone. They demand global,
integrated solutions, which the United Nations is best
suited to provide. The International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, concluded last year,
ongoing work in developing a convention on transnational
organized crime and the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change — all
show that we are capable of working together to enhance
our human security.
Moving the human security agenda forward also
requires that we redouble efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and risk. Peace and stability are
indispensable to security, but they are not, regrettably,
humanity?s birthright. They must be built. Two years ago,
we launched the Canadian Peace-building Initiative. Its
objective is to address the unique challenges of societies
recovering from conflict. Through this initiative, projects
have been undertaken in Guatemala to assist civil society
to implement the peace agreements, in Bosnia to promote
awareness of the peace accords, in Mozambique to
support a programme to exchange weapons for farming
tools, and in West Africa to support the initiative led by
Mali to promote a West African arms moratorium. These
are small steps, certainly, but constructive ones in
working locally to build peace.
Today, I am pleased to release a report entitled
“Peace in Progress”, which documents the results
obtained to date and the wide range of partners with
whom we have worked. As the title suggests, Canada
intends to carry on with its partners in empowering those
working to build peaceful and stable societies in their
own countries.
It has been a half-century since a distinguished
Canadian international civil servant, John Humphrey,
wrote the first draft of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. Since then over 60 international human
rights instruments have been adopted. Countries have
shown a new and welcome willingness to cooperate with
the international human rights system.
But we must build on that progress, and one of the
most important ways that the Assembly can make its
contribution this year is to support a strong United
Nations declaration on human rights defenders to protect
24


those who are protecting those whose human rights are
being abused.
(spoke in French)
The growing integration of human rights, including
women?s rights, into all other aspects of United Nations
activity is a recent and important breakthrough. On the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the conditions exist to achieve progress in attaining
the goals set out by its drafters. This is good news.
However, a review of the human rights situation around the
globe makes it painfully clear that we remain far short of
these goals.
We need to take advantage of the momentum that this
anniversary presents. The United Nations human rights
system must be assured of both the political support of the
membership and increased regular budget financing if it is
to do the job we have entrusted to it.
(spoke in English)
The growth of intra-State conflicts caused by
differences of religion, language, race or ethnicity has
reinforced the need to protect marginalized groups. To do
so, both Governments and civil society must have ready
access to information about human rights situations around
the world. To this end, Canada has launched for the record
an annual report drawn from United Nations sources, which
we are making available on the Internet to provide constant
updated information concerning human rights around the
globe.
Certainly, of those at risk from conflict, none are more
at risk than children. The targeting of children in
warfare — both as fighters and as victims — is intolerable.
The ground-breaking efforts of Graça Machel and the work
of the Secretary-General?s Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu, merit special
and ongoing support.
Enhancing human security also requires establishing
legal instruments. The agreement in Rome to establish the
International Criminal Court is a major fundamental step
towards that goal. This Court will help to deter some of the
most serious violations of international humanitarian law.
It will help give new meaning and global reach to
protecting the vulnerable and the innocent. By isolating and
stigmatizing those who commit war crimes or genocide and
removing them from the community, it will help end cycles
of impunity and retribution. Without justice there is no
reconciliation, and without reconciliation there can be no
peace.
We need to move forward urgently in making the
Court a reality. We should begin during this session of
the General Assembly to bring the Court into operation.
We who have supported the Court should ratify the
Statute as soon as possible. We must also work to
understand and address the concerns of those States that
remain hesitant about the Court — without diluting its
effectiveness. Ultimately, we must ensure that we have an
institution that will be credible, responsible and effective.
Respect for civil and political rights is necessary, but
in itself is not sufficient to create the conditions for stable
societies. Stability also requires economic and social well-
being.
Regrettably, statistics show that countries with the
lowest income are much more likely to fall victim to
violent conflict than others. The number of people whose
basic human needs are not being met remains
unacceptably and dangerously high. A quarter of the
world?s people live in severe poverty; more than 800
million face malnutrition; 180 million children under the
age of 14 work as child labourers. As the United Nations
human development index makes clear this year, the gap
between the haves and the have-nots continues to grow.
Countries overburdened by debt are less likely to be
developed and more likely to succumb to conflict.
Reducing the debt of the least developed nations allows
them to devote more resources to basic human needs.
That is why at the summit of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) in Ouagadougou I announced a $20 million
contribution to the African Development Bank to support
the most heavily indebted African countries. That is also
why Canada has forgiven virtually all development-related
debt owed to us by the least developed countries —
almost $1 billion — and why we encourage others who
have not already done so to do likewise.
I think we all recognize that globalization presents
opportunities, but it also exposes all of us, especially the
most vulnerable, to greater economic and social
insecurity. The international financial turmoil of the past
months vividly demonstrates the impact these crises can
have on the daily lives of the least fortunate. It means
that we need to be sensitive to the social consequences of
financial volatility. And when crisis strikes, the United
Nations and its specialized agencies have a special
responsibility to assist those most severely affected.
25


There is no greater threat to our security than nuclear
proliferation. In 1945, Canada, despite the experience of the
most destructive war in history, decided to forgo the
nuclear option even though, as a participant in the
Manhattan Project, we had the technical capability and
material capacity to build our own nuclear weapons. In
1968, the Government of Canada confirmed that decision
and joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Every subsequent Canadian Government
has reaffirmed that commitment, and we have spent much
diplomatic effort to persuade others that nuclear weapons
are the problem, not the solution.
The non-proliferation regime has enhanced everyone?s
security. The credibility of that regime has been severely
tested over the years, but particularly over the past six
months. India?s and Pakistan?s nuclear tests put the entire
non-proliferation regime in jeopardy. Nuclear testing
undermines the basic goals and objectives of the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty. Testing puts all of us, not least the people of
the testing countries themselves, at greater risk. Therefore,
there can be no condoning these actions.
And there must be no rewards. We must not legitimize
the claims of would-be nuclear Powers, or confer any new
status on proliferators. We listened carefully to the
presentations of the Presidents of India and of Pakistan this
week and we welcome the indications they gave that they
would sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
But it is important to reiterate that Security Council
resolution 1172 (1998) calls upon India and Pakistan to sign
the Treaty without conditions, to participate purposefully in
the negotiations on a cut-off treaty on fissile materials, to
stop the weaponization of their nuclear programmes, to
impose strict export controls on nuclear technology and to
embrace fully the non-proliferation regime. We urge them
to do so.
In that spirit, we welcome India?s and Pakistan?s
decision to relaunch their dialogue on Kashmir. We also
recognize that preventing horizontal proliferation, while
crucial, is no more important than preventing vertical
proliferation. Nuclear disarmament is the other half of the
nuclear bargain. That bargain is a balance of responsibilities
and obligations undertaken by nuclear-weapon and non-
nuclear-weapon States alike. Not all nuclear-weapon States
have begun to fulfil their obligations under Article VI of
the Non-proliferation Treaty, and we call upon them to
fulfil their responsibilities.
As we all recognize, this period of globalization
multiplies the challenges. It is Canada?s conviction that a
dynamic, responsive and flexible United Nations system
is the best way, perhaps the only way, to meet these
challenges.
(spoke in French)
To fulfil its leadership responsibilities, the United
Nations must be assured of reliable and adequate funding.
We cannot revitalize the United Nations so long as
Member States, particularly the most wealthy and
fortunate among them, contribute less to a system from
which they demand more. Renewal can be achieved only
if Member States pay their assessed dues, present and
past due, on time and without conditions.
(spoke in English)
Let me now speak of the Security Council. The
Security Council remains at the centre of what the United
Nations is all about: protecting against conflict and human
risk. However, the Council?s legitimacy is increasingly
being questioned. To remain credible, the Council must
re-examine traditional interpretations of its mandate. The
Council needs to broaden its horizons in addressing
emerging threats which impact on our security. Thematic
debates on these issues, in which all Member States can
participate, are a good step. The addition of peace-
building to the Council?s range of responses to threats to
peace and security is also welcome.
But the Council must also be more willing and more
consistent in both how and when it becomes involved.
The Council belongs to all Member States. It cannot be
allowed to focus on solving the problems of one region
and be indifferent to those of others.
The way the Council does its work must be more
open and more transparent. For example, Member States
involved in and affected by matters before the Council
must be allowed to exercise their Charter rights. Far from
constraining the Council?s efficiency, this will improve
the decisions it takes and render its actions more
effective. The trend for permanent members increasingly
to assume more control over the agenda, thereby
marginalizing elected members, runs counter to the
democratic principles which so inform our political
institutions at the close of the twentieth century. The
distinctions between permanent and elected members need
to be narrowed rather than widened.
26


In sum, the Council we need for the next century must
be more responsible, more accountable and less
impenetrable. We hope that members will support Canada
in advancing these aspirations.














﻿Twenty-four months ago, and
yesterday in the memory of America, the centre of New
York City became a battlefield, and a graveyard, and
the symbol of an unfinished war. Since that day,
terrorists have struck in Bali, in Mombassa, in
9

Casablanca, in Riyadh, in Jakarta, in Jerusalem,
measuring the advance of their cause in the chaos and
innocent suffering they leave behind.
Last month, terrorists brought their war to the
United Nations itself. The United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad stood for order and compassion. For that
reason, the terrorists decided it must be destroyed.
Among the 22 people who were murdered was Sergio
Vieira de Mello. Over the decades, that good and brave
man from Brazil gave help to the afflicted in
Bangladesh, Cyprus, Mozambique, Lebanon,
Cambodia, Central Africa, Kosovo and East Timor, and
was aiding the people of Iraq in their time of need.
America joins you, his colleagues, in honouring the
memory of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the memory
of all those who died with him in the service of the
United Nations.
By the victims they choose and by the means they
use, the terrorists have clarified the struggle we are in.
Those who target relief workers for death have set
themselves against all humanity. Those who incite
murder and celebrate suicide reveal their contempt for
life itself. They have no place in any religious faith,
they have no claim on the world's sympathy, and they
should have no friend in this Hall.
Events during the past two years have set before
us the clearest of divides: between those who seek
order and those who spread chaos, between those who
work for peaceful change and those who adopt the
methods of gangsters, between those who honour the
rights of man and those who deliberately take the lives
of men, women and children without mercy or shame.
Between those alternatives there is no neutral
ground. All Governments that support terror are
complicit in a war against civilization. No Government
should ignore the threat of terror because to look the
other way gives terrorists the chance to regroup, recruit
and prepare. All nations that fight terror as if the lives
of their own people depended on it will earn the
favourable judgement of history.
The former regimes of Afghanistan and Iraq knew
those alternatives and made their choices. The Taliban
was a sponsor and servant of terrorism. When
confronted, that regime chose defiance, and that regime
is no more. Afghanistan's President, who is here today,
now represents a free people who are building a decent
and just society. They are building a nation fully joined
in the war against terror.
The regime of Saddam Hussain cultivated ties to
terror while it built weapons of mass destruction. It
used those weapons in acts of mass murder and refused
to account for them when confronted by the world. The
Security Council was right to be alarmed. The Security
Council was right to demand that Iraq destroy its
illegal weapons and prove that it had done so. The
Security Council was right to vow serious
consequences if Iraq refused to comply. And because
there were consequences   because a coalition of
nations acted to defend the peace and the credibility of
the United Nations   Iraq is free, and today we are
joined by the representatives of a liberated country.
Saddam Hussain's monuments have been
removed, and not only his statues. The true monuments
of his rule and his character   the torture chambers,
the rape rooms and the prison cells for innocent
children   are closed. And as we discover the killing
fields and mass graves of Iraq, the true scale of
Saddam's cruelty is being revealed.
The Iraqi people are meeting hardships and
challenges, like every nation that has set out on the
path of democracy. Yet, their future promises lives of
dignity and freedom, and that is a world away from the
squalid, vicious tyranny they have known. Across Iraq,
life is being improved by liberty. Across the Middle
East, people are safer because an unstable aggressor
has been removed from power. Across the world,
nations are more secure because an ally of terror has
fallen.
Our actions in Afghanistan and Iraq were
supported by many Governments, and America is
grateful to each one. I also recognize that some of the
sovereign nations of the Assembly disagreed with our
actions. Yet, there was and there remains unity among
us on the fundamental principles and objectives of the
United Nations. We are dedicated to the defence of our
collective security and to the advance of human rights.
Those permanent commitments call us to great work in
the world, work that we must do together. So, let us
move forward. First, we must stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq as they build free and stable
countries. The terrorists and their allies fear and fight
this progress above all because free people embrace
hope over resentment and choose peace over violence.
The United Nations has been a friend of the
Afghan people, distributing food and medicine, helping
refugees return home, advising on a new constitution
10

and helping to prepare the way for nationwide
elections. NATO has taken over the United Nations
mandated security force in Kabul. American and
coalition forces continue to track and defeat al Qaeda
terrorists and the remnants of the Taliban. Our efforts
to rebuild that country go on. I have recently proposed
to spend an additional $1.2 billion for the Afghan
reconstruction effort, and I urge other nations to
continue contributing to that important cause.
In the nation of Iraq, the United Nations is
carrying out vital and effective work every day. By the
end of 2004, more than 90 per cent of Iraqi children
under age five will have been immunized against
preventable diseases such as polio, tuberculosis and
measles, thanks to the hard work and high ideals of
UNICEF. Iraq's food distribution system is operational,
delivering nearly a half million tons of food per month,
thanks to the skill and expertise of the World Food
Programme.
Our international coalition in Iraq is meeting its
responsibilities. We are conducting precision raids
against terrorists and holdouts of the former regime.
Those killers are at war with the Iraqi people. They
have made Iraq the central front in the war on terror.
And they will be defeated. Our coalition has made sure
that Iraq's former dictator will never again use
weapons of mass destruction. We are now interviewing
Iraqi citizens and analysing records of the old regime
to reveal the full extent of its weapons programmes and
its long campaign of deception. We are training Iraqi
police, border guards and a new army so that the Iraqi
people can assume full responsibility for their own
security.
At the same time, our coalition is helping to
improve the daily lives of the Iraqi people. The old
regime built palaces while letting schools decay, so we
are rebuilding more than a thousand schools. The old
regime starved hospitals of resources, so we have
helped to supply and reopen hospitals across Iraq. The
old regime built up armies and weapons while allowing
the nation's infrastructure to crumble, so we are
rehabilitating power plants, water and sanitation
facilities, bridges and airports. I have proposed to
Congress that the United States provide additional
funding for our work in Iraq, the greatest financial
commitment of its kind since the Marshall Plan.
Having helped to liberate Iraq, we will honour
our pledges to Iraq, and by helping the Iraqi people
build a stable and peaceful country we will make our
own countries more secure.
The primary goal of our coalition in Iraq is self-
government for the people of Iraq, reached by an
orderly and democratic process. That process must
unfold according to the needs of Iraqis, neither hurried
nor delayed by the wishes of other parties. And the
United Nations can contribute greatly to the cause of
Iraqi self-government.
America is working with friends and allies on a
new Security Council resolution, which will expand the
United Nation's role in Iraq. As in the aftermath of
other conflicts, the United Nations should assist in
developing a constitution, training civil servants and
conducting free and fair elections. Iraq now has a
Governing Council, the first truly representative
institution in that country. Iraq's new leaders are
showing the openness and tolerance that democracy
requires, and they are also showing courage. Yet every
young democracy needs the help of friends. Now the
nation of Iraq needs and deserves our aid, and all
nations of good will should step forward and provide
that support.
The success of a free Iraq will be watched and
noted throughout the region. Millions will see that
freedom, equality and material progress are possible at
the heart of the Middle East. Leaders in the region will
face the clearest evidence that free institutions and
open societies are the only path to long-term national
success and dignity. And a transformed Middle East
would benefit the entire world by undermining the
ideologies that export violence to other lands.
Iraq as a dictatorship had great power to
destabilize the Middle East. Iraq as a democracy will
have great power to inspire the Middle East. The
advance of democratic institutions in Iraq is setting an
example that others, including the Palestinian people,
would be wise to follow. The Palestinian cause is
betrayed by leaders who cling to power by feeding old
hatreds and destroying the good work of others. The
Palestinian people deserve their own State. They will
gain that State by embracing new leaders committed to
reform, to fighting terror and to building peace.
All parties in the Middle East must meet their
responsibilities and carry out the commitments they
made at Aqaba. Israel must work to create the
conditions that will allow a peaceful Palestinian State
to emerge. Arab nations must cut off funding and other
11

support for terrorist organizations. America will work
with every nation in the region that acts boldly for the
sake of peace.
A second challenge we must confront together is
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Outlaw regimes that possess nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and the means to deliver them
would be able to use blackmail and create chaos in
entire regions. Those weapons could be used by
terrorists to bring sudden disaster and suffering on a
scale we can scarcely imagine. The deadly combination
of outlaw regimes, terror networks and weapons of
mass murder is a peril that cannot be ignored or wished
away. If such a danger is allowed to fully materialize,
all words, all protests, will come too late.
Nations of the world must have the wisdom and
the will to stop grave threats before they arrive. One
crucial step is to secure the most dangerous materials at
their source. For more than a decade, the United States
has worked with Russia and other States of the former
Soviet Union to dismantle, destroy or secure weapons
and dangerous materials left over from another era.
Last year in Canada, the G-8 nations agreed to
provide up to 20 billion dollars, half of it from the
United States, to fight this proliferation risk over the
next ten years. Since then, six additional countries have
joined the effort. More are needed, and I urge other
nations to help us meet this danger.
We are also improving our capability to interdict
lethal materials in transit. Through our Proliferation
Security Initiative, eleven nations are preparing to
search planes, ships, trains and trucks carrying suspect
cargo and to seize weapons or missile shipments that
raise proliferation concerns. These nations have agreed
on a set of interdiction principles consistent with
current legal authorities, and we are working to expand
the Proliferation Security Initiative to other countries.
We are determined to keep the world's most destructive
weapons away from all our shores and out of the hands
of our common enemies.
Because proliferators will use any route or
channel that is open to them, we need the broadest
possible cooperation to stop them. Today I ask the
United Nations Security Council to adopt a new
antiproliferation resolution. That resolution should call
on all Members of the United Nations to criminalize
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to
enact strict export controls consistent with international
standards and to secure any and all sensitive materials
within their own borders. The United States stands
ready to help any nation draft these new laws and to
assist in their enforcement.
A third challenge we share is a challenge to our
conscience. We must act decisively to meet the
humanitarian crises of our time. The United States has
begun to carry out the Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief, aimed at preventing AIDS on a massive scale
and treating millions who have the disease already. We
have pledged 15 billion dollars over five years to fight
AIDS around the world.
My country is acting to save lives from famine as
well. We are providing more than 1.4 billion dollars in
global emergency food aid, and I have asked our
United States Congress for 200 million dollars for a
new famine fund so that we can act quickly when the
first signs of famine appear. Every nation on every
continent should generously add their resources to the
fight against disease and desperate hunger.
There is another humanitarian crisis, spreading,
yet hidden from view. Each year, an estimated eight to
nine hundred thousand human beings are bought, sold
or forced across the world's borders. Among them are
hundreds of thousands of teenage girls and others as
young as five who fall victim to the sex trade. This
commerce in human life generates billions of dollars
each year, much of which is used to finance organized
crime. There is a special evil in the abuse and
exploitation of the most innocent and vulnerable. The
victims of the sex trade see little of life before they see
the very worst of life   an underground of brutality
and lonely fear. Those who create these victims and
profit from their suffering must be severely punished.
Those who patronize this industry debase themselves
and deepen the misery of others, and Governments that
tolerate this trade are tolerating a form of slavery.
This problem has appeared in my own country
and we are working to stop it. The Protect Act, which I
signed into law this year, makes it a crime for any
person to enter the United States or for any citizen to
travel abroad for the purpose of sex tourism involving
children. The Department of Justice is actively
investigating sex tour operators and patrons, who can
face up to 30 years in prison. Under the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, the United States is using
sanctions against Governments to discourage human
trafficking.
12

The victims of this industry also need help from
Members of the United Nations. This begins with clear
standards and the certainty of punishment under the
laws of every country. Today, some nations make it a
crime to sexually abuse children abroad. Such conduct
should be a crime in all nations. Governments should
inform travellers of the harm this industry does and the
severe punishments that will fall on its patrons. The
American Government is committing $50 million to
support the good work of organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them shelter, medical treatment and the hope of
a new life. I urge other Governments to do their part.
We must show new energy in fighting back an old
evil. Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century after
slavery was officially ended in its last strongholds, the
trade in human beings for any purpose must not be
allowed to thrive in our time.
All the challenges I have spoken of this morning
require urgent attention and moral clarity. Helping
Afghanistan and Iraq to succeed as free nations in a
transformed region; cutting off the avenues of
proliferation; abolishing modern forms of slavery  
these are the kinds of great tasks for which the United
Nations was founded. In each case, careful discussion
is needed and, also, decisive action. Our good
intentions will be credited only if we achieve good
outcomes. As an original signer of the United Nations
Charter, the United States of America is committed to
the United Nations and we show that commitment by
working to fulfil the United Nations stated purposes
and by giving meaning to its ideals.
The founding documents of the United Nations
and the founding documents of America stand in the
same tradition. Both assert that human beings should
never be reduced to objects of power or commerce,
because their dignity is inherent. Both recognize a
moral law that stands above men and nations, but
which must be defended and enforced by men and
nations. And both point the way to peace   the peace
that comes when all are free. We secure that peace with
our courage and we must show that courage together.



﻿It is a
great pleasure for me to address this important
gathering. I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly and to wish you well.
As is well-known, Canada has always believed in
a multilateral approach to global issues — not for
ideological reasons, but because it is a proven way to
enhance security and to resolve those over-arching
problems that transcend national frameworks.
The present era provides us with enormous
opportunities for action. We can improve health and
extend life expectancy, especially in poor countries; we
can safeguard security and the rights of citizens; and
we can increase access to education and help people to
fulfil their aspirations.
The present era also presents us with urgent
challenges: protecting the environment; rolling back
diseases such as AIDS and malaria; preventing conflict
and ending impunity for crimes against humanity;
putting a stop to terrorism and organized crime; and
controlling weapons of mass destruction.
Each Government is responsible for taking action
within its own borders. In this global era, however,
such issues cannot be successfully addressed by States
acting alone. Multilateral cooperation is indispensable
to ensure the well-being of citizens and to protect them
effectively from harm. We need only consider the fight
against terrorism. None of us has ever believed that
terrorism could be controlled, let alone stopped,
without the cooperation of all of us. The task of drying
up the sources of terrorist funding also requires
coordination and effective legal regimes. Information-
sharing is imperative if attacks are to be prevented.
The United Nations has been playing an
extremely useful role in this fight. Since the tragic
events of 11 September 2001, the Security Council has
been undertaking an extensive effort in support of the
fight against international terrorism.
We could also consider the issue of health.
Distance from the source of new viruses no longer
provides us with protection. The next virus may be just
an aeroplane flight away. Multilateral cooperation is
essential for the management of health threats. We risk
disaster if we do not share with each other all
information that is are available to us and if we do not
coordinate efforts to combat epidemics. Coordinated
action is also required for development in poor
countries and to ensure reasonable access to health
care.
We need only consider, furthermore, the ongoing
problem of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
The proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction
among States and terrorist groups represents a growing
threat. Such proliferation must be prevented through
coordination, the strict application of export controls,
rigorous verification, the enforcement of multilateral
treaties and other forms of collective action under
international law.
We all recognize that the United Nations has
enabled us to successfully address many international
challenges. But we also recognize that we have failed
in certain other cases. We have been slow to adapt the
United Nations to changing circumstances. The time
has come to begin bold renewal at the United Nations.
This morning, the Secretary-General set out
proposals that are timely, necessary and courageous. I
congratulate him on his remarkable statement, and I
can reaffirm that Canada subscribes fully to the
objectives that he proposes.
22

The United Nations remains the principal
instrument for effective multilateral action. I call on
my fellow leaders to make meaningful United Nations
reform a priority.
(spoke in English)
We should not be pessimistic about our ability to
succeed. Consider some United Nations successes: the
2000 Millennium Summit and, in Monterrey, Mexico,
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development. We created a shared framework on
setting priorities for more effective aid; we set targets
and key principles; we spelled out mutual
accountabilities for developed and developing
countries. That spirit of accountability and shared
responsibility also lies at the heart of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and of the Group
of Eight Africa Action Plan. And it has led to policy
initiatives with respect to market access and the
availability of pharmaceutical drugs to poor countries.
For instance, this year Canada eliminated virtually all
tariffs and quotas on products from least developed
countries.
At the same time, the outcome of the World Trade
Organization meeting in Cancún is very, very
worrisome. Agricultural subsidies of developed
countries must be radically reduced to give developing
countries — particularly in Africa — the chance to
prosper. The developed world has an obligation to act,
and to act quickly.
Colleagues, on no issue is progress more
necessary or more urgent than on the protection of the
innocent. Canada, in partnership with others, advocates
putting the protection of people at the heart of the
mandate of the Organization. Too often, conflicts are
allowed to start, even when the whole world can see
what the dreadful consequences will be. Too often,
innocent civilians are left to their fate.
Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda. In all conscience, we must ask
ourselves: are we any more ready now than we were
then to respond to another Rwanda? I fear the answer,
unfortunately, is no.
It was with our collective failures in Bosnia and
Rwanda in mind that Canada sponsored the
International Commission on Intervention and State
Sovereignty. The Commission has done excellent work,
and in its report, it argues that sovereignty entails
responsibility as well as rights.
The most fundamental duty of a State is to protect
its people. When a Government cannot or will not do
so, the responsibility to protect them becomes
temporarily a collective international responsibility.
Some question that idea because they fear intervention
on slight pretexts or with motives other than human
protection. Others, owing to their own tragic
experience, fear that there would be too little outside
involvement. We need to reconcile those two concerns.
We believe — as does the Commission — that, in
the face of great loss of life or ethnic cleansing, the
international community has a moral responsibility to
protect the vulnerable. The primary purpose must be to
avert and end human suffering. No entity is more
appropriate than the Security Council to authorize
military action to protect the innocent. But the member
States of the Council have sometimes failed the
innocent. Past failures must motivate us to prepare
better for future crises. We can reform how this place
works, improve its effectiveness, enhance its relevance
and inspire its participants.
Before closing, I wish to comment on some of the
challenges to peace and security that we face. In
Afghanistan, much has been achieved and much
remains to be done. For our part, Canada has been
engaged in the war on terrorism from the outset. We
are the largest current military contributor to the
International Security Assistance Force. We have
pledged 250 million Canadian dollars for humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction. We are committed to
helping the Afghani people build a democratic,
pluralistic society. In Iraq, we have also joined the
international effort to help the Iraqi people. We have
decided to contribute 300 million Canadian dollars, one
of the largest single-country pledges we have ever
made. We are encouraged that the members of the
Security Council are exploring how to elaborate upon
the United Nations role in the reconstruction and in
progress towards Iraqi self-government.
The situation in the Middle East preoccupies us,
as it does the entire international community. Innocent
lives on both sides are being lost. Israeli families and
Palestinian families fear for their children and for their
future. Terrorism and violence — in whatever form, to
advance whatever cause — simply creates more
violence and takes even more innocent life.
23

For the international community, as for Israelis
and Palestinians, despair is not an option. Our goal
must remain a political solution based on two viable
States, Israel and Palestine, within secure and
recognized borders. We need to support Palestinian
efforts to develop modern, transparent and responsible
government. We need also to support those seeking to
promote dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians in
the search for practical solutions to the core issues. It is
our responsibility to help those who are preparing for
peace, which must one day come.
When the time is right, the international
community must be able to offer a robust international
presence that will guarantee the safety and security of
Israel and of a Palestinian State, and we should be
getting ready to do so now. In addition, we should be
looking for lessons on how the international
community has acted in other places to stop
violence — as, for example, in Cyprus and in Kosovo.
Regional tensions, the war on terror and efforts at
reconstruction in recent hot spots must, nevertheless,
not distract us from continuing to help Africans realize
their goals for trade and investment, democracy, human
development and good governance.
In summary, multilateral cooperation remains
indispensable. The United Nations remains at the heart
of the multilateral system. New challenges demand
new structures, and a historic opportunity has emerged.
Let us seize it, and let us realize the powerful
idea that created the United Nations — the idea that
nations can unite to save their people from the scourge
of war. Let future generations say of us that we did not
betray that idea — that we realized the potential of this
great body, supported it, renewed it and re-energized it
to better serve humanity.




Thank you for the honour of
addressing the General Assembly. The American
people respect the idealism that gave life to this
Organization. And we respect the men and women of
the United Nations, who stand for peace and human
rights in every part of the world. Welcome to New
York City, and welcome to the United States of
America.
During the past three years, I have addressed the
General Assembly in a time of tragedy for my country,
and in times of decision for all of us. Now we gather at
a time of tremendous opportunity for the United
Nations and for all peaceful nations. For decades, the
circle of liberty, security and development has been
expanding in our world. This progress has brought
unity to Europe, self-government to Latin America and
Asia and new hope to Africa. Now we have the historic
8

chance to widen the circle even further, to fight
radicalism and terror with justice and dignity and to
achieve a true peace, founded on human freedom.
The United Nations and my country share the
deepest commitments. Both the American Declaration
of Independence and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights proclaim the equal value and dignity of
every human life. That dignity is honoured by the rule
of law, limits on the power of the State, respect for
women, protection of private property, free speech,
equal justice and religious tolerance. That dignity is
dishonoured by oppression, corruption, tyranny,
bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent.
Both our founding documents affirm that this bright
line between justice and injustice — between right and
wrong — is the same in every age, every culture and
every nation.
Wise Governments also stand for these principles
for very practical and realistic reasons. We know that
dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free
nations strive to resolve differences in peace. We know
that oppressive Governments support terror, while free
Governments fight the terrorists in their midst. We
know that free peoples embrace progress and life,
instead of becoming the recruits for murderous
ideologies.
Every nation that wants peace will share the
benefits of a freer world. And every nation that seeks
peace has an obligation to help build that world.
Eventually there is no safe isolation from terror
networks, or failed States that shelter them, or outlaw
regimes or weapons of mass destruction. Eventually
there is no safety in looking away, seeking the quiet
life by ignoring the struggles and oppression of others.
In this young century our world needs a new
definition of security. Our security is not merely found
in spheres of influence or some balance of power. The
security of our world is found in the advancing rights
of mankind.
Those rights are advancing across the world. And
across the world, the enemies of human rights are
responding with violence. Terrorists and their allies
believe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the United States Bill of Rights and every charter of
liberty ever written are lies to be burned and destroyed
and forgotten. They believe that dictators should
control every mind and tongue in the Middle East and
beyond. They believe that suicide and torture and
murder are fully justified to serve any goal they
declare. And they act on their beliefs.
In the last year alone terrorists have attacked
police stations and banks and commuter trains and
synagogues and a school filled with children. This
month in Beslan we saw once again how the terrorists
measure their success in the death of the innocent and
in the pain of grieving families. Svetlana Dzebisov was
held hostage along with her son and her nephew. Her
nephew did not survive. She recently visited the
cemetery and saw what she called the “little graves”.
She said, “I understand that there is evil in the world,
but what have these little creatures done?”
The Russian children did nothing to deserve such
awful suffering and fright and death. The people of
Madrid and Jerusalem and Istanbul and Baghdad have
done nothing to deserve sudden and random murder.
Those acts violate the standards of justice in all
cultures and the principles of all religions. All civilized
nations are in this struggle together and all must fight
the murderers.
We are determined to destroy terror networks
wherever they operate, and the United States is grateful
to every nation that is helping to seize terrorist assets,
track down their operatives and disrupt their plans. We
are determined to end the State sponsorship of terror,
and my nation is grateful to all that participated in the
liberation of Afghanistan. We are determined to
prevent proliferation and to enforce the demands of the
world, and my nation is grateful to the soldiers of many
nations who have helped to deliver the Iraqi people
from an outlaw dictator.
The dictator agreed in 1991, as a condition of a
ceasefire, to fully comply with all Security Council
resolutions, then ignored more than a decade of those
resolutions. Finally, the Security Council promised
serious consequences for his defiance. The
commitments we make must have meaning. When we
say “serious consequences”, for the sake of peace there
must be serious consequences. So a coalition of nations
enforced the just demands of the world.
Defending our ideals is vital, but it is not enough.
Our broader mission as United Nations Members is to
apply those ideals to the great issues of our time. Our
wider goal is to promote hope and progress as the
alternatives to hatred and violence. Our great purpose
is to build a better world beyond the war on terror.
9

Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have established a
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
In three years the contributing countries have funded
projects in more than 90 countries, and pledged a total
of $5.6 billion to those efforts. America has undertaken
a $15 billion effort to provide prevention and treatment
and humane care in nations afflicted by AIDS, placing
a special focus on 15 countries where the need is most
urgent. AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time,
and our unprecedented commitment will bring new
hope to those who have walked too long in the shadow
of death.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have joined together to
confront the evil of trafficking in human beings. We
are supporting organizations that rescue the victims,
passing stronger anti-trafficking laws and warning
travellers that they will be held to account for
supporting this modern form of slavery. Women and
children should never be exploited for pleasure or
greed, anywhere on Earth.
Because we believe in human dignity, we should
take seriously the protection of life from exploitation
under any pretext. In this session, the General
Assembly will consider a draft resolution sponsored by
Costa Rica calling for a comprehensive ban on human
cloning. I support that draft resolution and urge all
Governments to affirm a basic ethical principle: no
human life should ever be produced or destroyed for
the benefit of another.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have changed the way
we fight poverty, curb corruption and provide aid. In
2002 we created the Monterrey Consensus, a bold
approach that links new aid from developed nations to
real reform in developing ones. And through the
Millennium Challenge Account, my nation is
increasing our aid to developing nations that expand
economic freedom and invest in the education and
health of their own people.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have acted to lift the
crushing burden of debt that limits the growth of
developing economies and holds millions of people in
poverty. Since those efforts began in 1996, poor
countries with the heaviest debt burdens have received
more than $30 billion of relief. And to prevent the
build-up of future debt, my country and other nations
have agreed that international financial institutions
should increasingly provide new aid in the form of
grants rather than loans.
Because we believe in human dignity, the world
must have more effective means to stabilize regions in
turmoil and to halt religious violence and ethnic
cleansing. We must create permanent capabilities to
respond to future crises.
The United States and Italy have proposed a
Global Peace Operations Initiative. Group of Eight
(G-8) countries will train 75,000 peacekeepers —
initially from Africa — so they can conduct operations
on that continent and elsewhere. The countries of the
G-8 will help that peacekeeping force with deployment
and logistical needs.
At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible
suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, crimes my Government has concluded are
genocide. The United States played a key role in efforts
to broker a ceasefire, and we are providing
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people.
Rwanda and Nigeria have deployed forces in the Sudan
to help improve security so that aid can be delivered.
The Security Council adopted a new resolution that
supports an expanded African Union force to help
prevent further bloodshed and that urges the
Government of the Sudan to stop flights by military
aircraft in Darfur. We congratulate the members of the
Council on this timely and necessary action. I call on
the Government of the Sudan to honour the ceasefire it
signed, and to stop the killing in Darfur.
Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful
nations must stand for the advance of democracy. No
other system of government has done more to protect
minorities, to secure the rights of labour, to raise the
status of women or to channel human energy to the
pursuits of peace. We have witnessed the rise of
democratic Governments in predominantly Hindu and
Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian cultures.
Democratic institutions have taken root in modern
societies and in traditional societies. When it comes to
the desire for liberty and justice, there is no clash of
civilizations. People everywhere are capable of
freedom and worthy of freedom.
Finding the full promise of representative
Government takes time, as America has found in two
centuries of debate and struggle. Nor is there only one
10

form of representative Government, because
democracies by definition take on the unique character
of the peoples that create them. Yet this much we know
with certainty: the desire for freedom resides in every
human heart, and that desire cannot be contained
forever by prison walls or martial laws or secret police.
Over time and across the Earth, freedom will find a
way.
Freedom is finding a way in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and we must continue to show our
commitment to democracies in those nations. The
liberty that many have won at a cost must be secured.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a stake
in the success of the world’s newest democracies. Not
long ago, outlaw regimes in Baghdad and Kabul
threatened the peace and sponsored terrorists. Those
regimes destabilized one of the world’s most vital and
most volatile regions. They brutalized their peoples in
defiance of all civilized norms.
Today, the Iraqi and Afghan peoples are on the
path to democracy and freedom. The Governments that
are rising will pose no threat to others. Instead of
harbouring terrorists, they are fighting terrorist groups.
And this progress is good for the long-term security of
all of us. The Afghan people are showing extraordinary
courage under difficult conditions. They are fighting to
defend their nation from Taliban hold-outs and helping
to strike against the terrorist killers. They are reviving
their economy. They have adopted a Constitution
that protects the rights of all, while honouring their
nation’s most cherished traditions. More than 10
million Afghan citizens — over four million of them
women — are now registered to vote in next month’s
presidential election. To any who still would question
whether Muslim societies can be democratic societies,
the Afghan people are giving their answer.
Since the last general debate of this General
Assembly, the people of Iraq have regained
sovereignty. Today, in this Hall, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and his delegation represent a country that has
rejoined the community of nations. The Government of
Prime Minister Allawi has earned the support of every
nation that believes in self-determination and desires
peace. And under Security Council resolutions 1511
(2003) and 1546 (2004), the world is providing that
support. The United Nations and its Member nations
must respond to Prime Minister Allawi’s request and
do more to help build an Iraq that is secure,
democratic, federal and free.
A democratic Iraq has ruthless enemies because
terrorists know the stakes in that country. They know
that a free Iraq in the heart of the Middle East will be a
decisive blow against their ambitions for that region.
So a terrorist group associated with Al Qaeda is now
one of the main groups killing the innocent in Iraq
today, conducting a campaign of bombings against
civilians and the beheadings of bound men. Coalition
forces now serving in Iraq are confronting the terrorists
and foreign fighters so that peaceful nations around the
world will never have to face them within our own
borders.
Our coalition is standing beside a growing Iraqi
security force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
is providing vital training to that force. More than 35
nations have contributed money and expertise to help
rebuild Iraq’s infrastructure and, as the Iraqi Interim
Government moves towards national elections,
officials from the United Nations are helping Iraqis
build the infrastructure of democracy. Those selfless
people are doing heroic work and are carrying on the
great legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello.
As we have seen in other countries, one of the
main terrorist goals is to undermine, disrupt and
influence election outcomes. We can expect terrorist
attacks to escalate as Afghanistan and Iraq approach
national elections. The work ahead is demanding, but
those difficulties will not shake our conviction that the
future of Afghanistan and Iraq is a future of liberty.
The proper response to difficulty is not to retreat — it
is to prevail.
The advance of freedom always carries a cost,
paid by the bravest among us. America mourns the
losses to our nation and to many others, and today I
assure every friend of Afghanistan and Iraq, and every
enemy of liberty: We will stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq until their hopes of freedom and
security are fulfilled.
These two nations will be a model for the broader
Middle East, a region where millions have been denied
basic human rights and simple justice. For too long,
many nations, including my own, tolerated and even
excused oppression in the Middle East in the name of
stability. Oppression became common, but stability
never arrived. We must take a different approach. We
must help the reformers of the Middle East as they
work for freedom and strive to build a community of
peaceful, democratic nations.
11

That commitment to democratic reform is
essential to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace
will not be achieved by Palestinian rulers who
intimidate opposition, tolerate corruption and maintain
ties to terrorist groups. The long-suffering Palestinian
people deserve better. They deserve true leaders
capable of creating and governing a free and peaceful
Palestinian State.
Even after the setbacks and frustrations of recent
months, good will and hard effort can achieve the
promise of the road map to peace. Those who would
lead a new Palestinian State should adopt peaceful
means to achieve the rights of their people and create
the reformed institutions of a stable democracy. Arab
States should end incitement in their own media, cut
off public and private funding for terrorism, and
establish normal relations with Israel. Israel should
impose a settlement freeze, dismantle unauthorized
outposts, end the daily humiliation of the Palestinian
people, and avoid any actions that prejudice final
negotiations. And world leaders should withdraw all
favour and support from any Palestinian ruler who fails
his people and betrays their cause.
The democratic hopes we see growing in the
Middle East are growing everywhere. In the words of
the Burmese democracy advocate Aung San Suu Kyi:
“We do not accept the notion that democracy is a
Western value. To the contrary, democracy simply
means good Government rooted in responsibility,
transparency and accountability.”
Here at the United Nations, Members know this to be
true. In recent years, this Organization has helped
create a new democracy in East Timor and the United
Nations has aided other nations in making the
transition to self-rule.
Because I believe that the advance of liberty is
the path to both a safer and better world, today I
propose establishing a democracy fund within the
United Nations. This is a great calling for this great
Organization. The fund would help countries lay the
foundations of democracy by instituting the rule of law,
independent courts, a free press, political parties and
trade unions. Money from the fund would also help set
up voter precincts and polling places and support the
work of election monitors. To show our commitment to
the new democracy fund, the United States will make
an initial contribution, and I urge all other nations to
contribute as well.
Today I have outlined a broad agenda to advance
human dignity and enhance the security of all of us.
The defeat of terror, the protection of human rights, the
spread of prosperity, the advance of democracy —
these causes, these ideals, call us to great work in the
world. Each of us alone can only do so much. Together
we can accomplish so much more.
History will honour the high ideals of this
Organization. The Charter states them with clarity: “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ...
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights ... to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom”.
Let history also record that our generation of
leaders followed through on these ideals, even in
adversity. Let history show that in a decisive decade,
members of the United Nations did not grow weary in
our duties, or waver in meeting them. I am confident
that this young century will be liberty’s century. I
believe we will rise to this moment, because I know the
character of so many nations and leaders represented
here today. And I have faith in the transforming power
of freedom.
May God bless you.I want to talk today about
United Nations reform, particularly about the way we
should serve and the way we should do business if the
United Nations is to play the role we want it to in the
twenty-first century.
The world is organized into independent States
and the primary obligation of Governments is to look
after their own people. This presents us with a
fundamental dilemma, for unless we also act
collectively on the basis of our common humanity, the
rich will become richer, the poor will become poorer,
and hundreds of millions of people will be at risk.
Thus, we need institutions whose primary obligation is
to our common humanity. Herein lies the importance of
the United Nations. It comprises Member States, but its
mission is, indeed, to serve the world's peoples. Its
Charter makes this very clear:
'We the peoples of the United Nations [are]
determined - to reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the
human person, in the equal rights of men and
women.'
Others, quite properly, will talk about structural
reform. But today I want to talk about reforms
designed to put our common humanity at the centre of
the agenda of the United Nations.
Canada sees five areas where bold steps are
required. The first area is the responsibility to
protect - the need to develop the rules and the
political will that would allow the international
community to intervene in countries to prevent a
humanitarian catastrophe.
Darfur is a human tragedy of immense
proportions.
(spoke in French)
We welcome the Security Council's support for
expanded engagement there, although we believe the
international response should be more robust. The
African Union, which has agreed to lead that effort,
must have the unswerving support of the international
community. Canada is offering $20 million to assist,
and we call on others to join in now.
(spoke in English)
It is good that the international community is
finally moving, but it has taken far too long. The
Security Council has been bogged down in debating
the issue. It has looked at whether Darfur is a threat to
international peace and security. It is considering
whether the tragedy qualifies as genocide, because
either could provide justification, under international
law, for intervention. The fact is, though, that, while
the international community struggles with definitions,
the people of Darfur struggle with disaster. They are
hungry, they are homeless, they are sick, and many
have been driven out of their own country. Tens of
thousands have been murdered, raped and assaulted.
War crimes and crimes against humanity are being
committed.
We must not let debates about definitions become
obstacles to action. We should not have to go through
such painful exercises to figure out how to respond to
humanitarian catastrophe. We need clear principles that
31

will allow the international community to intervene
much faster in situations like the one in Darfur.
Our common humanity should be a powerful
enough argument, and yet that is precisely what is
missing. Put simply, there is still no explicit provision
in international law for intervention on humanitarian
grounds. The 'responsibility to protect' is intended to
fill that gap. It says that we should have the legal right
to intervene in a country on the grounds of
humanitarian emergency alone. We should be able to
do so when the Government of a country is unwilling
or unable to protect its people from extreme harm as a
result of internal war, repression or, simply, State
failure.
The primary responsibility for the protection of a
State's own population lies with that State itself. We
are not arguing for a unilateral right to intervene in one
country whenever another country feels like it. It is
always preferable to have multilateral authority for
intervention in the affairs of a sovereign State. What
we seek is the evolution of international law and
practice so that multilateral action may be taken in
situations of extreme humanitarian emergency.
International law is moving in the right direction.
Existing instruments such as the Convention on
Genocide and human rights treaties acknowledge
Statesí obligations to their own people. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court and
criminal tribunals are further steps forward. Thus
customary international law is evolving to provide a
solid basis in the building of a normative framework
for collective humanitarian intervention. To speed it
along, however, Member States should now adopt a
General Assembly resolution recognizing the evolution
of sovereignty to encompass the international
responsibility to people. In turn, the Security Council
should establish new thresholds for when the
international community judges that civilian
populations face extreme threats; and for exploring
non-military and, if necessary, proportionate military
options to protect civilians. The responsibility to
protect is not a license for intervention; it is an
international guarantor of political accountability.
The second area I would speak to is the
'responsibility to deny', which encompasses the need
to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not
under any circumstances spread to States or terrorists
prepared to use them, especially against innocent
civilians. Non-proliferation and disarmament remain
fundamental pillars of the commitment of the United
Nations to international peace and security.
In both cases, multilateralism has been
challenged by dramatic changes in the security climate,
and there is a clear need to make our systems stronger
and more responsive. Strict verification is the key.
The United Nations nuclear watchdog, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, needs stronger
tools, and it needs political support. We need more
rigorous controls on sensitive nuclear technology, and
the Security Council must be prepared to deal with
non-compliance effectively. The fact is that, as we all
know, determined proliferators have been able to
circumvent their treaty obligations. The United Nations
should establish a permanent inspection and
verification mechanism that can reinforce and
supplement existing verification systems.
More generally, and to show how far we have to
go on the disarmament agenda, and on the
responsibility to deny, the Conference on
Disarmament, charged with the responsibility for
negotiating new multilateral instruments, has not even
been able to agree on a work plan since 1998. Surely
the Conference must get back to productive work.
(spoke in French)
The third area is the 'responsibility to respect'
human beings, their dignity, their freedom and their
culture. I would like to talk about a broader notion of
human rights - one that can encompass individual
rights, the protection of collective rights and pluralism,
as reflected in the concept of cultural diversity. In fact,
the United Nations Development Programmeís recent
Human Development Report stresses that cultural
diversity is also tied in with freedom. That is why we
support a United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization instrument on cultural
promotion.
Since the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, humanity has
made remarkable strides in the area of human rights.
Conventions are now in place to protect a number of
rights: civil, political, economic, social and cultural.
But we must remain vigilant in the face of new forms
of abuse, such as international trafficking of people and
the horrifying child sex trade.
32

In addition to the protections afforded individual
rights, various conventions have also been concluded
to better protect minorities, to denounce racial
discrimination and to combat marginalization.
Nevertheless, it is apparent that the most divisive
conflicts result, more often than not, from attempts by
one group to prevent other groups from realizing their
perfectly legitimate economic, religious, social or
political aspirations. Entire communities are
threatened. Violence, civil strife and even failed States
ensue. Kosovo, Bosnia, the Great Lakes region in
Africa, and today Darfur are the most chilling
examples. The international community must take
vigorous action to protect individuals as well as
minority communities. It is not enough to simply
possess various legal instruments; they must be put
into practice. Institutions responsible for human rights
must reveal to the entire world those guilty of abuse -
be they armed groups, communities or Governments -
and take the necessary measures. The United Nations is
our moral conscience and it is up to us to act.
The fourth area is the responsibility to build. The
objectives of the Millennium Summit on poverty,
disease and global insecurity will come to naught if we
do not follow up on the Monterrey Consensus,
according to which genuine development requires a
holistic approach to such issues as debt, market access
and social investment.
That being said, as we have seen in Haiti over the
past 10 years, all the aid in the world will have only a
fleeting effect if a country does not have functioning
public institutions. We must build countries'
governance capacities and take the time to do it right.
The same is true for economic institutions. Those that
work well marshal the creative energies of local
entrepreneurs. That is the message of the United
Nations Commission on the Private Sector and
Development: a thriving economy is the product of
citizens' trust in their countryís public institutions. In
brief, development depends on governance.
Lastly, there is responsibility for the future,
which is to say the obligation we have to leave a better
world for our children. That is no small challenge. It
involves all aspects of our common heritage: health,
the environment, oceans, space. The new pandemics
demand our most urgent attention. AIDS, SARS and
the Ebola virus are sounding a terrifying alarm, but
scientists are predicting even worse diseases. The
World Health Organization must bolster its
surveillance systems. It must do a better job
coordinating its actions with those of other United
Nations bodies.
Beyond health issues lies the whole question of
managing our environment. It is gravely threatened.
Only international cooperation and technical assistance
can bring lasting solutions to such problems as access
to clean air and water. Furthermore, we need an oceans
policy that allows us to rebuild our fish stocks. Access
to fisheries must be better regulated under international
law. Simply put, the pillage of those global resources
must stop.
Space is our final frontier. It has always captured
our imagination. What a tragedy it would be if space
became one big weapons arsenal and the scene of a
new arms race. In 1967, the United Nations agreed that
weapons of mass destruction must not be based in
space. The time has come to extend that ban to all
weapons.
(spoke in English)
I have talked today about responsibilities. In
conclusion, let me mention one more: the
responsibility to act. We await the report of the
Secretary-Generalís High-Level Panel and we
anticipate substantial recommendations for reform.
Many countries are focused on the Security Council
and we should support reforms that will make it more
effective and will permit those countries which actively
support United Nations peacekeeping, development
and other activities to continue to have a meaningful
opportunity to serve.
But we must also look forward to
recommendations that go well beyond the Security
Council. For example, there is a need to set out
measures to facilitate an integrated response to the
diverse range of security challenges that each of us
faces, from the proliferation of terrorism to improving
United Nations coordination on development, health
and the environment. As individual countries, as
individual members of regional organizations, and as
participants in various international groups that form
around specific interests, we all must act to bridge the
differences that divide us and to forge an international
consensus for reform of the United Nations.
In another context, for instance, Canada has
proposed a special meeting at which leaders from 20 or
so countries in the developed and developing worlds
33

would get together to discuss our collective challenges
and responsibilities. This could very well include
providing a major boost to United Nations reform
efforts.
In any event, no matter how one comes at it, the
time has come for real reform of the United Nations.
All of us in this Hall and in our respective
Governments must put aside narrow interests and work
to common purpose to strengthen this universal
institution, whose activities give force to our common
humanity.
Four years ago, at the Millennium Summit, the
leaders of the world agreed that 'we have a duty - to
all the world's people, especially the most vulnerable'
(resolution 55/2, para. 2). That duty will not be
discharged unless we as Governments speak to the
dignity and to the freedom of every human being on
Earth, here at the world's meeting place of nations.﻿Mr. President, my first words must be ones of congratulation to you on the assumption of the highest office in the Assembly. Your election represents not only a recognition of your own outstanding personal qualities but also an indication of the respect in which your country is held by the community of nations.
155.	During the special session of the Assembly on economic cooperation, I had the opportunity of appearing here twice to address the Assembly. Different evaluations will be made of the results of the session but none of them will term the exercise a full success. The world's economic problems remain starkly visible: hundreds of millions of lives wasting in poverty, the development goals of many developing nations knocked askew by soaring bills for essential imports and recession in the industrialized world. Solutions are not easily available. The issues are complex. Quite clearly, approaches vary. In many respects, the difficulties of the special session in reaching agreement reflect the difficulties inherent in the world's economic problems. However, I urge all nations to look towards productive compromise on the negotiating issues so that the process of trying to deal together with the problems can go forward. The General Assembly provides (hat opportunity.
156.	Meanwhile, Governments need to look hard at their own efforts to contribute to economic redressment. As announced at the closing meeting of the special session, Canada will for the rest of the decade be increasing its aid contribution.  We are also studying other areas where our contribution to development can be improved.
157.	The world which this Assembly reflects is one buffeted by change. Both a dynamic of development and an irresistible force, change is in many respects a mixed blessing. It can be volatile, destabilizing. Northern and southern methods and cultures meet and sometimes clash. Accelerated aspirations are often frustrated. People fear change: they may reject it, often after breakdowns occur, or suppress its social and political expression, which can be an invitation to revolution.
158.	But change will go on and must go on. We must, whenever possible, make both technological change and social change acts of progress. The task of our world Organization is to prompt and channel change into positive and predictable directions. The end lesson, as far as the work of the General Assembly is concerned, is that economic development and orderly adaptation to its dynamic of change are basic ingredients of peace and security.
159.	For example, I say again that there cannot be authentic or enduring security in the world as long as there is widespread global poverty and economic injustice. Increasingly, we recognize the economic interdependence of the nations of the world. This reflects both an economic fact and a method of approaching issues. Our interdependence is a sign of changing world relationships and is also a response to the dynamics of rapid change itself.
160.	The North South dialogue has its political dimension, as can be seen in most world crises. And just as we must accept change in our economic relationships and reject intervention and the economic subordination of one country by another, so we must reject the political and military equivalents. Just as we are strengthening our international instruments for promoting and channelling economic change, so we must continue to strengthen our methods and means for promoting international peace and social and political justice.
161.	A glance at our political geography can help to illustrate this.
162.	Where is there greater evidence of the resistance to change than in the perpetuated insult which apartheid in South Africa represents to any human being who cares about human dignity? 'Oh, but they are beginning to change', I am told; 'Do not disturb the process'. What process? Where are the changes? A minority of whites still totally dominates a majority of blacks through a repressive society and a system rooted in racist supremacy. This is not acceptable in any form and it never will be. South Africa must recognize the inevitability of change.
163.	We again welcome Zimbabwe to this body. We applaud the changes which its presence here represents.
164.	Similarly, we look forward to the day when we can welcome the representatives of Namibia to the General Assembly as representatives of a Member State. After more than three years of intensive United Nations effort, the settlement expected in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is within our grasp. Technical arrangements are in hand. Only the commitment on the part of South Africa is missing. Right now the circumstances for reaching a final and peaceful settlement are promising. If left untended, they will only deteriorate. A team of the Secretary General’s representatives is to meet shortly with representatives of South Africa in an effort to clear the way for reaching that final settlement. The consequences of continued resistance to change will be severe.
165.	It is with the deepest and most troubled apprehension that we contemplate Soviet action in Afghanistan. What is the occupation of that nonaligned country if not old-time great Power behaviour of the kind which the United Nations was formed to eliminate? What has this invasion meant to us all? The process of East West detente, of vital importance to the world community, is now undermined; world peace itself is now more fragile; confidence about intentions is now shaken; nonalignment is certainly now in jeopardy: and, lastly, the flouting by the Soviet Union of the solution proposed last January by the huge majority of States in this Assembly, and particularly of the call for the early and unconditional withdrawal of all Soviet troops, inevitably colours our reaction to positions the Soviet Union takes on other issues before this Assembly. We again call on the Soviet Union to restore to Afghanistan the sovereign rights which its people are entitled to expect and deserve.
166.	I turn now to the situation in Kampuchea. There again we have witnessed the invasion of a small nation by a powerful neighbour wishing to impose its solution, its views, its regime. There again we have an outpouring of refugees looking to the world for survival. Is this what some leaders consider to be realpolitik'. a policy of strike when you can, take what you can? What cynicism. Kampuchea racked for decades by other peoples' wars and then by a regime of undiluted destruction, is a global concern. Many of us have joined Kampuchea's neighbours in keeping the survivors alive and in settling the refugees. But the real problems of that area require a political solution and we emphatically reject the occupation of Kampuchea and the attempt to control change by force of arms which Viet Nam's invasion by definition represents.
167.	I welcome and support the vigorous efforts of the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to promote un equitable solution to the issues. I urge the international community to persevere in this just cause and not to accept that a fait accompli has been imposed by Viet Nam.
168.	Let me turn now to the Middle East. Is that situation to exasperate this Assembly for the next 30 years? Has the past not taught us how dangerous a state of continual unresolved tension can be for the people of the area itself as well as for the world as a whole? Respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of every State in the area and for the right of all States, including Israel, to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries must remain the cornerstone in efforts to reach a comprehensive solution to the Middle East dispute. There must also be recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Li.ke other peoples they are entitled to political expression within a defined territory and to participation in the negotiating process to find a just and comprehensive peace settlement.
169.	The current negotiations have led to a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt. There has been progress in dealing with serious problems, but difficulties remain. Further decisions must soon be made or else achievements to date will be jeopardized with all the consequences that this would entail. Whatever the method or forum, I urge all parties to recognize the form of change and to move away from confrontation and violence to moderation and compromise.
170.	The aforementioned situations are some, but by no means all, of those where there is a threat to world peace through resistance to change or through the recourse to arms to impose change. In different ways, they serve to illustrate the need to abandon prevailing methods of resolving conflicts in exchange for collectively developed machinery, and not to revert to the rule of force. The world will not become more stable in the next decade. The rate of change will accelerate. There is a real probability that certain States may try to exploit the vulnerability of others to their own advantage. A determination to channel and to control the volatile impact of change into constructive, peaceful directions is necessary. First, however, we need to break away from old patterns of approach and attitude.
171.	The North South dialogue is an obvious example in this respect. We must recognize our global responsibilities, but resist the notion that every problem must have a global, generalized solution. I also think that there are issues and stages of discussion where bloc to bloc negotiation will be less useful. By way of illustration, I think of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. There a complicated array of different groupings of countries arranged to correspond with differing economic, political and even geographical interests, has wrestled with longstanding questions of principle and tradition. This method has enabled the countries involved to draft, in effect, a new constitution for two thirds of the world's surface in the more pragmatic, realistic and, I believe, productive way which a pluralistic approach can afford. Change demands such departures from accepted dogma and I believe that our approach to North South issues is clearly in need of both stimulation and reform.
172.	Another area of potential institutional improvement is the United Nations Secretariat itself. The office of the Secretary General has unique value as an instrument for attenuating conflict. The Government of Iran still keeps United States diplomatic personnel hostages almost a year after their forceful seizure. Although the tireless efforts of the Secretary General to arrange a solution have not yet achieved their objective, they illustrate the potential of his office for promoting solutions, at least in other less unreasonable and chaotic circumstances. In the past 35 years his predecessors have in fact often led the Organization into significant developments, such as peacekeeping operations, which improved our collective ability to manage conflict. Yet there is a potential for further improvement to increase the Organization's capability for mediation in conflict.
173.	Cyprus is a case in point. There, we need a two pronged effort to heal the divisions which have plagued its two communities since shortly after independence. First, peacekeeping efforts should continue. Canadian armed forces have served with UNFICYP for 16 years, and Canada intends to maintain its contribution as long as active efforts to achieve a settlement appear to have promise. Secondly, direct mediation efforts by the Secretary General and his representatives should be encouraged, to promote substantive negotiations with representatives of the two communities in order to resolve their differences peaceably. In this case, peacekeeping and mediation go hand in hand, both dependent upon the skill and dedication of the United Nations to furthering our common aim of ensuring peaceful change.
174.	By a similar token, I believe that greater use should be made of the secretary General’s responsibilities under the Charter to act with the authority of his office in situations arising from violations of human rights. For many years Canada has introduced and supported proposals in the General Assembly to reinforce the Organization's abilities to promote and protect human rights.
175.	I continue to support the concept of a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the strengthening of the role of review and inquiry of the Commission on Human Rights. Although the attainment of these objectives may take some time, interim solutions are available. I urge the Secretary General to use his good offices where the evidence of human rights violation is sufficiently serious. All States should extend their cooperation to him in order to alleviate difficulties and avoid confrontations and to further the interests of international cooperation.
176.	Neither the political nor the humanitarian roles which I have suggested demand changes in the Charter of the United Nations or fundamentally different mandates from the General Assembly. Rather, these roles rest on a willingness of Member States to respect the Charter, to recognize the desirability of channelling the winds of change into constructive directions and to abandon old behavioural patterns.
177.	Another area to which the Canadian Government attaches special significance is disarmament. At this General Assembly, the midpoint between the first and second special sessions on disarmament, I welcome the much greater attention which the United Nations gives to the subject, although I regret the lack of specific and ratified agreements on further measures of arms control and disarmament. Are the peoples of the world not entitled to feel impatience, for example, that our Governments have still failed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty which can be accepted and ratified by all States, or that a treaty to ban chemical weapons remains blocked by disagreement over means of verification?
178.	Canada is committed to breaking the pattern of madness which spiralling rearmament represents. Our recently appointed special Ambassador for disarmament will be working at this session towards the goals set out by Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada two years ago at the special session on disarmament, especially those that restrain and cut back the competition in strategic nuclear weapons. Without restraint in this area we can have little reason for optimism that the proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world can be stopped. As a first step we will pursue vigorously the cessation of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons.
179.	Breaking the patterns of the past, adapting to change, improving our collective machinery—these are the emphases we should give to this Assembly's work. When countries revert to outdated type by hanging on to privileges, using force, keeping self-serving methods of approach to issues, our collective achievement is diminished.
180.	As an example, may I return briefly to the recent results of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The emerging law of the sea treaty would be robbed of much of its meaning without universality and durability. Those conditions will be fulfilled only if all interested parties commit themselves to a consensus which is fair to all. We have not seen such a consensus in at least one vital area, that of seabed mining. If, for example, the interests of the land based mineral producers, including Canada and many developing countries, are ignored or overridden because of the desire of some States to secure unrestricted access to the mineral riches of the seabed, then the future of the treaty of the law of the sea may be badly compromised. The problem can only be compounded by States stepping outside the internationally agreed framework to play the game by their own set of rules.
181.	In order to bridge the gap between producing and consuming countries and find a common basis of agreement on this issue, we have joined a number of countries from the developing world in initiating an independent United Nations study to determine the impact of the seabed production formula proposed by the major mineral consuming States. I hope that the results of this study will encourage a fresh look at the whole question. That fresh look could be crucial to the future of the new convention, which, in turn, is crucial to the future of us all.
182.	The recent law of the sea experience is instructive in two different respects. First, it has demonstrated that serious negotiations carried on within a sensible, practical framework can resolve difficult questions involving deep changes in the approach to issues where the willingness to do so exists. Secondly, it demonstrates in perhaps the most cogent possible way that no institution, no matter how well conceived or well administered, can function in the absence of agreement on such a fundamental question as adherence to the principle of consensus.
183.	I have spoken about change in the international system, and I have tried to underline our collective responsibility to ensure that the forces of change lead in positive directions. This Assembly is itself a symbol of change in the world. Three times as large as it was 30 years ago, with quite different emphases in its work, it needs now to set its imperatives against the ideals identified in the Charter. Although the Charter was drawn up in the absence of most countries represented here, I am sure that those ideals still represent a valid framework for our endeavour. Indeed, they are constants in a sea of change. I urge our rededication to them.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. It is a recognition of your extraordinary diplomatic skills, but, more important, your election is a tribute to your country and to its contribution to international cooperation and understanding.
52.	On behalf of the United States delegation to this Assembly, I come here today to express anew the United States commitment to the United Nations. I come also to express our hopes for its future at a moment when the world is deeply troubled by tension and uncertainty. Peace is threatened by smouldering regional conflicts and by assaults of the strong upon the weak. Nations large and small are buffeted by steeply rising oil prices and serious economic strains. Within many countries poverty and oppression form an explosive combination.
53.	A few weeks ago I spoke to this Assembly about the international economy.  I stressed the obligation of nations to cooperate in facing world economic problems: payments imbalances, energy inflation, slowed growth in many developing countries, the spectres of environmental decay and even famine.
54.	Our inability to reach a consensus on procedures for global negotiations is a pause in the process, not a failure in our objectives. I do not mean to say that the differences that have kept us from finding a formula for global negotiations can be glossed over. They are real. They are substantive. But we are prepared to use the span of this General Assembly to continue discussions that can lead to procedures, to an agenda and to a negotiating structure that will foster broad agreement among all the nations here represented.
55.	Today I want to look beyond economic problems to the one condition that is a prerequisite for all material progress: peace. If we truly care about building a world in which peace and justice prevail, the world's nations, and this Organization, cannot ignore certain political and legal obligations also—obligations every bit as compelling as the economic obligations I spoke of earlier.
56.	These responsibilities are not new. They are proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. But dangerous new circumstances require that we stress them anew, lest we betray the very purpose the United Nations is designed to serve.
57.	Our first obligation is to refrain from aggression and to deal with it vigorously. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations provides for 'the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace'. Article 2 prohibits 'the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State'.
58.	Accordingly, the United Nations must confront the continuing assault upon Afghanistan. I raise this issue not to set off a rhetorical exchange, not in the interest of polemics, but in the interest of peace.
59.	Today, more than 1 million refugees attest to the human toll of the violence in Afghanistan. And more is at stake than the independence of one country. If this assault continues, the independence and integrity of every small defenceless nation will be called into question.
60.	Last January, at an emergency special session, this Assembly condemned by a large majority the assault upon Afghanistan. We strongly believe that at the thirty-fifth session also the General Assembly must work under the Charter to reinforce the principles of the United Nations. We must work for a total withdrawal of Soviet troops and a political settlement. We must support the principles of non-intervention, self-determination and non-alignment for Afghanistan.
61.	In Kampuchea as well, armed aggression continues. We welcome reports of some progress made under th4 leadership of the United Nations Secretary General and international organizations in relieving the conditions of deprivation and disease so prevalent a year ago. The threat of renewed starvation requires significant further contribution from the international community.
62.	Despite some improvement in Kampuchea's desperate human situation, no progress whatsoever has been made towards securing the withdrawal of occupying Vietnamese forces and the restoration of self-determination to the Kampuchea people, as called for in last year's resolution on Kampuchea, sponsored by the nonaligned nations. We strongly support the basis for a settlement, including the concept of an international conference, contained in that resolution, which was passed by a large majority.
63.	Above all, let us keep in mind two basic purposes for which this body exists: to oppose armed aggression and to assuage its consequences. No achievement could be more important to the future influence and effectiveness of the United Nations. No failure could be more damaging than a failure to deal firmly with these issues.
64.	Our second obligation, proclaimed by our Charter, is to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Achieving this goal remains urgently important in two key regions: the Middle East and southern Africa.
65.	In the Middle East, the United States is committed to a comprehensive peace—an enduring peace based on the principles of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We are determined to pursue to a successful conclusion the peace process begun at Camp David two years ago this month.  Already that process has achieved something once thought impossible: peace between Egypt and Israel. Now the negotiations are focused upon, a second goal: taking a significant first step towards resolving the Palestinian problem. The current autonomy talks have as their goal arriving at interim arrangements to establish full autonomy for the people of the West Bank and Gaza. After that, the process will proceed to negotiations which will determine the final status of those areas.
66.	As we seek to resolve this conflict, we are committed to finding a solution to the Palestinian problem in all its aspects and, at the same time, to permanent security for the State of Israel. We have no illusions about the difficulties of this quest. We are dealing with a conflict of long duration and intense feelings. There can be no short cuts.
67.	So today I call on all members of this Assembly to lend their support to these negotiations. Camp David has proved so far, and remains for the future, the most hopeful and productive avenue to peace in the Middle East. There is no alternative to negotiations except further conflict. Let us remember that differences are rivers to be crossed, not reasons to turn back.
68.	That persistence can bear fruit—that negotiations can yield peace—has been reaffirmed in recent months in southern Africa. Through arduous negotiations, the new nation of Zimbabwe has been born in peace. Today we have reason to celebrate not only this accomplishment, but also the way in which nations worked together to achieve it. And for the future, the Zimbabwe settlement offers hope—and a model—for peaceful settlements in southern Africa and elsewhere.
69.	The United States will continue its strong efforts to advance the United Nations plan for Namibia. There are no major substantive issues left to be resolved. I am convinced that the United Nations plan would be implemented fairly. All that remains is for South Africa to act in its own interest, in the interest of peace in the region, and in the interest of the Namibian people: to accept implementation of the United Nations settlement. If that does not happen soon, this chance for peace could be lost, and we would face a bitter future of protracted conflict and tragic human suffering.
70.	The settlement in Zimbabwe can also provide a precedent for peaceful change in South Africa. We will continue to urge the Government of South Africa to abandon the repugnant policy of apartheid. We consider it urgent that talks among representative leaders begin on the issue of peaceful, orderly change in South Africa—while there is still time.
71.	We must continue our search for peace and restoration of respect for international law in other parts of the world as well. In Lebanon, in Cyprus and elsewhere, we will lend our full support to the peace making and peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations.
72.	And although the holding of American hostages in Iran is not an item on the agenda of this Assembly, it remains a matter of extreme urgency that this tragic impasse be resolved—resolved in a way that strengthens peace and restores respect for international law. The continuing situation in Iran contributes to uncertainty about security and stability in Southwest Asia. The security of Iran itself and the stability of the area depend on a united, strong and independent Iran living at peace with its neighbours.
73.	With the end of the former regime and the death of the late Shah, a chapter in Iran's history has closed. As a new chapter opens, we emphasize that we recognize the reality of the Iranian revolution, and we respect the right of the Iranian people to choose their own form of government without intervention of any kind. With the emergence of a new constitution and governmental structure and the gradual consolidation of authority, the Islamic Republic of Iran can assume its obligations and independent role in this community of nations.
74.	An indispensable step will be the safe return to their families of the American hostages in Iran. Throughout the 324 days of their captivity, the Member States and institutions of the United Nations have expressed their concern for the hostages in numberless ways and channels. With their safe release, repeatedly called for by the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, Iran could end its isolation from those nations that live in accordance with international law, and sanctions would be terminated.
75.	Today I urge the nation of Iran, its Parliament, and its people also, to consider the human face of the hostage problem. These innocent people and their families have experienced acute suffering. I ask this community of nations to join us in urging that their ordeal be brought to a safe, honourable and prompt end. We also know that in Iran, as in the United States, there are deep feelings as a result of grievances and suffering perceived in the past. We are prepared to do our part in resolving fairly the issues between us. The Iranian Parliament has announced that it will name a commission to deal with the hostage question. We hope that this positive step will bring the Government of Iran closer to a decision on release of the hostages.
76.	The United States shares many common values with the people of Iran. When the safe return of all the hostages to their families is assured, we are prepared to deal on a basis of mutual respect and equality with all the outstanding issues and misunderstandings between Iran and the United States and to reach understandings on the principles which will govern our relationship.
77.	As we look to the future, 1 urge the United Nations, as soon as possible, to take firm and effective measures to counter the global menace of attacks upon diplomats and others. The danger it poses to civilized international life is growing; no institution of peace can afford to ignore it. For our part, the United States seeks peace with all nations. Whether it be with Iran or with the Soviet Union, we are eager to reduce tensions and to restore productive relations as soon as their actions allow.
78.	In all cases our policies will reflect our commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations. As the President of the United States, Mr. Carter, has affirmed, we shall not interfere in Poland's affairs and we expect that others will also respect the right of the Polish nation to resolve its own problems in its own way.
79.	Another obligation of nations is the control and limitation of arms. A period of heightened tension in the world makes this obligation more difficult to fulfil, but also more urgently important.
80.	For that reason, let me underscore anew today the commitment of my Government to arms control, to practical measures that contribute to world peace and enhance international stability. President Carter voiced this basic commitment when lie was sworn in as President in January 1977. It remains equally valid today.
81.	Let me give several concrete illustrations of that commitment. Some of the arms control efforts I shall mention involve active participation by the United Nations; others involve negotiations outside the United Nations framework. But all are of intense concern to the international community, for an unrestrained arms race would darken the horizon for all humanity.
82.	First, it is President Carter's intention to move forward as speedily as possible towards ratification of the SALT II Treaty.  Accordingly, the President intends to consult with the leadership of the United States Senate soon after the election with a view to resuming the ratification process as soon as is feasible. We consider it of cardinal importance to ratify SALT II and to move forward with the SALT process. The Soviet Union, however, must recognize that for many Americans recent Soviet actions have called into question the Soviet Union's commitment to international peace and cooperation. Accordingly, we call upon the Soviet Union to act in ways that will enhance, not damage, the prospects for SALT II and for other arms control efforts.
83.	Secondly, we are committed to the pursuit of meaningful and equal limitations on theatre nuclear forces in the framework of the SALT III negotiations. We are ready to begin talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union this week to discuss this subject and to seek agreement on the arrangements for beginning these talks promptly.
84.	Thirdly, we are committed to seeking an effective and verifiable comprehensive test ban treaty. Substantial progress has been made towards this goal and we are determined to continue pursuing these efforts vigorously.
85.	Fourthly, the United States is committed m the Vienna talks to achieving mutual and balanced force reductions and limitations to diminish the risks inherent in the massive presence of military forces in central Europe.
86.	Fifthly, we are prepared to develop further the security aspects of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. If the international situation permits and if there is balanced progress in all areas, including the human rights area, at the second review session of the Conference, to be held at Madrid in November, we are prepared to consider a post Madrid European conference of the signatory States to the Final Act of the Conference on developing militarily significant confidence-building measures.
87.	Sixthly, we support the effort of the newly expanded Committee on Disarmament to develop the provisions of an international convention on radiological weapons We also support its work towards a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons and we continue to pursue our bilateral negotiations with the Soviet Union on an effective prohibition against chemical weapons.
88.	Finally, the further spread of nuclear weapons would constitute a serious threat to international peace and security. We firmly support efforts, therefore, to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation. The Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a cornerstone of those efforts; we strongly urge non-parties to embrace the Treaty, for it enhances the security of all nations, nuclear weapon and nonnuclear weapon States alike. At the second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons there was unanimous agreement on the fundamental soundness of the Treaty and the desirability of universal adherence to it. For those nonnuclear weapon States that have not joined the Treaty, we attach particular importance to the goal of achieving comprehensive, full scope international safeguards coverage. We believe that acceptance of such coverage should become a condition of new nuclear supply commitments to such States. We shall continue to work for a world in which all nations can share in the peaceful use of nuclear energy without the danger of spreading nuclear weapons.
89.	Before I leave this subject, let me emphasize our deep concern over another arms control matter. If arms control is to be successful, agreements must be fully honoured. Questions such as those raised by persistent reports that chemical weapons have been used in Afghanistan, Laos and Kampuchea cannot be ignored by the international community. To do so would undermine both arms control and international law. The United States, therefore, welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on Disarmament at its most recent session on the need for international efforts to determine the facts behind those reports. We believe that an impartial investigation into those reports could most appropriately be launched under the auspices of the United Nations.
90.	Important as they are, the obligations I have mentioned by no means exhaust the responsibilities which rest upon us as nations, and as a community of nations, if we are to secure peace. By peace, I do not mean the fragile, artificial stability that comes with repression of a people by its Government; I mean the true stability of societies that are at peace with themselves because the rights of their citizens are protected and nurtured.
91.	So let me close by underscoring another obligation of nations: our obligation to uphold human rights and to concern ourselves compassionately with fundamental human needs.
92.	In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the community of nations has nobly defined the concepts of human rights and human dignity, just as in the Charter of the United Nations we have outlined the precepts of peaceful cooperation.
93.	The failure of nations to live up to those human rights obligations is a continuing tragedy, made painfully manifest in the waves of refugees now sweeping across the world.
94.	Those suffering people present a dramatic challenge to the international community represented by This Assembly. Over the past five years the United States has welcomed more than 600,000 refugees—from Africa, from Asia, from Europe, from the Middle Last and from the western hemisphere. In the past five months alone we have received more than 120,000 people driven from Cuba to our shores—an influx which has presented extraordinary challenges to our resources.
95.	In recognition of the human need implicit in this worldwide wave of refugees, President Carter has made known the intention of the United States to accept an additional 217,000 refugees over the next year.
96.	Our country, of course, is only one of the many which have welcomed and helped refugees. More than 1 million Afghan refugees have fled to Pakistan; 400,000 Indo Chinese are in Thailand. More than 3 million are homeless in sub-Saharan Africa. Clearly this is a global problem; it requires a global response.
97.	The refugee resettlement efforts agreed upon at Geneva last year [see A/35/12, para. 6] demand our energy and our generosity. We must strengthen the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
98.	The humanitarian programmes of the United Nations and of the other agencies require a renewed commitment from all of us to their support and to their strengthening. But ultimately this human tragedy can be dealt with only by removing its root causes: by overcoming poverty, by ending the abuse of human rights within nations and by establishing peace among nations so that no person need be forced to flee from home and country.
99.	This is why my nation supports the growth of democracy and personal freedom in the Americas, in Africa and in every region of the world. Achieving these ultimate purposes remains a supreme challenge for the United Nations. Making progress towards them must be the work of this thirty fifth session of the General Assembly.
100. Let us not ignore the facts. Ours is a moment of worldwide economic difficulty and a time of tension between great Powers. At such moments, peaceful cooperation becomes even more difficult than usual. At such moments, our obligations as members of this Assembly of nations take on new importance. At such times, when a cloud of troubling events darkens our aspirations to ultimate peace, we can light our path by adhering faithfully to our Charter, to the international law that binds us, to the standards of international conduct that protect us.
101.	Let us hope that the light we generate by doing so will dispel the clouds of tension and discord that darken the world today.
102.	The United States will do its part. We will live up to our obligations to oppose aggression, to build peace, to limit arms, to support human rights and to foster economic justice, for us and for other nations, these endeavours can immeasurably improve life on earth and build the just and lasting peace for which all our peoples yearn.
It is both 
an honour and a pleasure for me to once again address 
the Assembly.

(spoke in English)
For more than 70 years, Canada has supported the 
United Nations and its institutions in the pursuit of 
world peace. On many occasions Canadians have put 
their lives on the line to deter active conflict between 
peoples. It is a duty we accept and it is a record of which 
we are proud.

Today, there are many embattled parts of the world 
where the suffering of the local populations and the 
threats to global security deserve our urgent attention, 
and I could easily use my entire time here on any one 
of them. There are, however, other areas of service to 
humankind. It is to some of those that I wish to speak 
tonight, for there is more to peace than the absence of 
war. Where human misery abounds, where grinding 
poverty is the rule, where justice is systematically 
denied, there is no real peace — only the seeds of 
future conflict. 

(spoke in French)
Of course, misery and injustice are not the only 
roots of war. We need only look at the world today to 
appreciate that.

(spoke in English)
Then we understand how the worst of human 
nature — perverse ideologies, religious extremism and 
the lust for power and plunder — can rob people in so 
many places of property, hope and life itself. That is 
why Canada has always been ready and willing to join 
with other civilized peoples and to challenge affronts to 
the international order, affronts to human dignity itself, 
such as those that are today present in Eastern Europe, 
particularly Ukraine, in the Middle East — Iraq, Syria 
and elsewhere — and of course many parts of Africa.

Canada’s positions on those issues are well known, 
and we will continue to contribute to the extent to 
which we are able in assisting our friends and allies 
in the international community to deal with those 
grave challenges. But while those extreme situations 
are being confronted, other problems — pandemics, 
climate change and, of course, the problems of 
underdevelopment — remain. 

(spoke in French)
And we feel strongly that no effort is ever in vain 
if it offers peoples an alternative to conflict and the 
possibility of a better life for them and their families.

(spoke in English)
Canadians therefore seek a world where freedom, 
democracy, human rights and the rule of law are 
respected. We hold those things to be intrinsically right 
and good. We also believe that they are the necessary 
foundation for a better world for more people and are 
necessary for prosperity. With prosperity comes hope, 
and with hope, the greater inclination of free peoples 
everywhere to find peaceful solutions to the things 
that divide them. Indeed, we believe that freedom, 
prosperity and peace form a virtuous circle. 

For that reason, the growth of trade among nations 
and the delivery of effective development assistance to 
ordinary people — simple, practical aid — are the things 
that have become the signatures of our Government’s 
outreach in the world. Trade means jobs, growth and 
opportunities. It has made great nations out of small 
ones. The story of my own country, Canada, is a case in 
point. Historically, trade has built our country, just as 
today it is reshaping our world. Trade means ordinary 
people can support their families and even dare to 
dream of something much more.



(spoke in French)
Our Government has worked hard to establish a 
vast network of modern trade agreements.

(spoke in English)
The trade agreements we have concluded tear down 
the barriers of tariff and excise and enlarge markets and 
opportunities for buyers and sellers alike. Canada has 
now established such links with countries that today 
possess more than a quarter of the world’s people and 
nearly half the world’s business. And our free-trade 
network will grow larger yet. It is not, by the way, an 
exclusive club for wealthy nations.

(spoke in French)
Canada has already liberalized its trade with 
countries better known for their determination to 
succeed than for the size of their economies, thereby 
opening the way for them to access Canadian and other 
markets. We have no reason to stop now. As indicated 
by my colleague from Senegal, President Macky Sall, 
“Aid is needed for development, but what is needed 
even more is investment”. He is quite right.

(spoke in English)
Yet no matter how freely we trade, millions of 
people will need a helping hand for some time to come. 
Easily the most important example, and the one closest 
to my heart, is the worldwide struggle upon which 
so many of you have been engaged, in the maternal, 
newborn and child health initiative. Saving the lives 
of the world’s most vulnerable mothers, infants and 
children must remain a top global priority. That is, the 
world must honour the commitments made in this very 
Hall to mothers and children in the year 2000. And 
there has been remarkable progress.

(spoke in French)
Thanks to inexpensive vaccines and the combined 
efforts of multiple partners, more children are 
being vaccinated today than ever before. And as the 
importance of nutrition becomes better understood, 
more and more children are surviving. Thanks to 
simple, low-cost, easily accessible techniques, literally 
millions of mothers and children who a mere 14 years 
ago might have died not only survive today, but thrive.

(spoke in English)
I think especially of the 2010 meeting of world 
leaders at Muskoka, which raised about $7.5 billion 
dollars, $2 billion of it from private donors. Based on 
that, the United Nations launched what the Secretary-
General called the “Every woman, every child” initiative, 
with the goal of saving 16 million lives by 2016. An 
important aspect of that work has been monitoring 
both the receipt of monies pledged and how they are 
used. The assurance of full accountability has allowed 
recipients to plan with greater certainty and donors to 
give with confidence. With His Excellency President 
Kikwete of Tanzania, whom we have just heard, it was 
my honour to co-chair the World Health Organization’s 
Information and Accountability Commission linked to 
that initiative.

On this, we have a clear vision, and that vision is 
achievable. We know how to help a great many of those 
vulnerable people. We have seen what can be done. We 
want simply to rally the passion and the will to make it 
happen. We are preventing deaths, and we can prevent 
more — deaths of thousands of children every day from 
easily preventable causes. We can stop the thousands 
of mothers dying in childbirth who would survive 
with relatively little intervention. We also know who 
we need to be working with — new partnerships that 
bring together Governments and agencies of the United 
Nations, including the World Health Organization, the 
World Food Programme and UNICEF, with the private 
sector, partnerships that are producing real results and 
taking us to new heights of excellence.

Here I am thinking of the Maternal, Newborn 
and Child Health Network in Canada, a group that 
represents a broad base of Canadian civil society and 
is a key implementing partner on the ground. As many 
representatives know, in May in Toronto, Canada hosted 
the world’s leading actors on that subject. We heard 
the success stories — for example, the Micronutrient 
Initiative through which 180 million children received 
vitamin A, pills that cost pennies but drop child 
mortality by 25 per cent. We heard about the Global 
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization and how 
during the three-year period between 
2010 and 2013, 
immunizations saved the lives of 2 million children.

We have partnerships to deliver better nutrition and 
partnerships to deliver better measurement, because 
vital statistics are critical. One cannot manage what 
one cannot measure. And in that mission, we measure 
progress in precious lives saved. So every child needs 
a birth certificate.



(spoke in French)
We also heard that in the world today is a greater 
obligation with regard to accountability, not only with 
regard to the vast sums of money pledged, but also the 
way in which that money is spent.

(spoke in English)
So our consensus was clear. We have seen success, 
and we have momentum. Saving the lives of children 
and mothers is a fight we can win. To get it done, two 
things are needed now: political focus and renewed 
financial commitment. I therefore urge the Assembly, in 
the strongest terms, to ensure that, maternal, newborn 
and child health remains a clear and top priority in the 
evolving post-2015 development agenda — and one 
of a limited number of priorities. That is the political 
focus we need. Then there is the financial commitment. 
I know we all have many competing priorities. But we 
have come so far that to stop now would be a tragedy.

I must say I was very encouraged this afternoon 
at the Secretary-General’s “Every woman, every child” 
event, when President Kim of the World Bank and other 
leaders announced new financing for the Bank’s Global 
Financing Facility for Every Woman Every Child. 
That Facility will help developing countries access the 
financing required to improve their health systems. I 
was pleased to announce that Canada would financially 
support the World Bank’s Global Financing Facility for 
Every Woman Every Child. 

(spoke in French)
We urge other countries to do likewise because 
to provide viable solutions to prevent the tragic death 
of women and children, we need to increase budget 
allocations on the part of both donors and the developing 
countries.

(spoke in English)
In closing, let me just say this. There are many 
individual countries and many specific causes that will 
rightly occupy our deliberations here this week. Let us 
also not forget to look beyond those crises at the long-
term opportunities and efforts that can truly transform 
the world. We have it in our power to create a better 
kind of world for our children’s children than the one 
we have today.

And we should, for it was never the intention of the 
founders of the United Nations — Canada being one 
of them — that ours would be a world where terrorists 
could get the resources necessary to sow death and 
destruction but where workers and families could 
not get jobs and opportunities, or where mothers and 
children could not obtain the necessities required to 
live and thrive.

The world that Canada strives for is the world that 
the founders of the United Nations wanted from the 
beginning, as boldly articulated in their Declaration 
of 1 January 1942 — a world where “life, liberty, 
independence and religious freedom” are defended, 
where “human rights and justice” are preserved, and 
where all join “in a common struggle against savage and 
brutal forces seeking to subjugate the world”. In such 
a world, there can be prosperity for the impoverished, 
justice for the weak and, for the desperate, that most 
precious of all things, hope.

It is easy to look at the many problems of the world 
today and become despondent. Yet for all our failings, 
there has been, for most of humankind, tremendous 
progress in my lifetime. Therefore, I am enough of an 
optimist to think that because we can create a more 
prosperous, fairer and hopeful world, not only should 
we, but indeed, I believe we will find the will to do so.
We come together at a 
crossroads between war and peace, between disorder 
and integration, between fear and hope. Around the 
globe, there are signposts of progress. The shadow of 
the Second World War that existed at the founding of 
this institution has been lifted, and the prospect of war 
between major Powers reduced. The ranks of Member 
States have more than tripled, and more people live 
under Governments that they elected. Hundreds of 
millions of human beings have been freed from the 
prison of poverty, with the proportion of those living 
in extreme poverty cut in half. And the world economy 
continues to strengthen after the worst financial crisis 
of our lives.

Today, whether you live in downtown Manhattan or 
in my grandmother’s village more than 200 miles from 
Nairobi, you can hold in your hand more information 
than the world’s greatest libraries. Together, we have 
learned how to cure disease and harness the power 
of the wind and the sun. The very existence of this 
Organization is a unique achievement, with the people 
of the world committing to resolve their differences 
peacefully and to solve their problems together. I often 
tell young people in the United States that, despite 
the headlines, this is the best time in human history 
to be born, for you are more likely than ever before to 
be literate, to be healthy and to be free to pursue your 
dreams.

And yet there is a pervasive unease in our world — a 
sense that the very forces that have brought us together 
have created new dangers and made it difficult for any 
single nation to insulate itself from global forces. As we 
gather here, an outbreak of Ebola overwhelms public 
health systems in West Africa and threatens to move 
rapidly across borders. Russian aggression in Europe 
recalls the days when large nations trampled small 
ones in pursuit of territorial ambitions. The brutality 
of terrorists in Syria and Iraq forces us to look into the 
heart of darkness.

Each of those problems demands urgent attention. 
But they are also symptoms of a broader problem: 
the failure of our international system to keep pace 
with an interconnected world. We, collectively, have 
not invested adequately in the public health capacity 
of developing countries. Too often, we have failed 
to enforce international norms when it has been 



inconvenient to do so. And we have not confronted 
forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism and 
hopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many 
parts of the globe.

Fellow representatives, we come together as 
United Nations with a choice to make. We can renew 
the international system that has enabled so much 
progress, or we can allow ourselves to be pulled back 
by an undertow of instability. We can reaffirm our 
collective responsibility to confront global problems, or 
be swamped by more and more outbreaks of instability. 
And for America, the choice is clear — we choose hope 
over fear. We see the future not as something out of our 
control, but as something we can shape for the better 
through concerted and collective effort. We reject 
fatalism or cynicism when it comes to human affairs. 
We choose to work for the world as it should be, as our 
children deserve it to be.

There is much that must be done to meet the test 
of this moment. But today I would like to focus on 
two defining questions at the root of so many of our 
challenges. Will the nations represented here today 
be able to renew the purpose of the United Nations 
founding, and will we come together to reject the cancer 
of violent extremism?

First, all of us — big nations and small — must meet 
our responsibility to observe and enforce international 
norms. We are here because others realized that we 
gain more from cooperation than from conquest. One 
hundred years ago, a World War claimed the lives of 
many millions, proving that with the terrible power of 
modern weaponry, the cause of empire ultimately leads 
to the graveyard. It would then take another World War 
to roll back the forces of fascism, the notions of racial 
supremacy, and form the United Nations to ensure that 
no nation can subjugate its neighbours and claim their 
territory.

Recently, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have 
challenged that post-war order. Here are the facts. After 
the people of Ukraine mobilized popular protests and 
calls for reform, their corrupt President fled. Against 
the will of the Government in Kyiv, Crimea was annexed 
by Russia. Russia poured arms into eastern Ukraine, 
fuelling violent separatists and a conflict that has killed 
thousands. When a civilian airliner was shot down from 
areas that those proxy forces controlled, those forces 
refused to allow access to the crash site for days. When 
Ukraine started to reassert control over its territory, 
Russia gave up the pretence of merely supporting the 
separatists and moved troops across the border.

That reflects a vision of a world in which might 
makes right; a world in which one nation’s borders 
can be redrawn by another and civilized people are 
not allowed to recover the remains of their loved ones 
because of the truth that might be revealed.

America stands for something different. We believe 
that right makes might, that bigger nations should not 
be able to bully smaller ones and that people should 
be able to choose their own future. Those are simple 
truths, but they must be defended. America and our 
allies will support the people of Ukraine as they develop 
their democracy and economy. We will reinforce our 
NATO allies and uphold our commitment to collective 
self-defence. We will impose a cost on Russia for its 
aggression, and we will counter falsehoods with the 
truth. And we call upon others to join us on the right 
side of history, for while small gains can be won at the 
barrel of a gun, they will ultimately be turned back if 
enough voices support the freedom of nations and the 
right of peoples to make their own decisions.

Moreover, a different path is available — the path of 
diplomacy and peace, and the ideals that this institution 
is designed to uphold. The recent ceasefire agreement in 
Ukraine offers an opening to achieve those objectives. 
If Russia takes that path — a path that for stretches of 
the post-Cold War period resulted in prosperity for the 
Russian people — then we will lift our sanctions and 
welcome Russia’s role in addressing common challenges. 
That is, after all, what the United States and Russia 
have been able to do in past years — from reducing our 
nuclear stockpiles to meeting our obligations under the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to cooperating to 
remove and destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons. 
That is the kind of cooperation we are prepared to 
pursue again, if Russia changes course.

That speaks to a central question of our global 
age — will we solve our problems together in a spirit of 
mutual interest and mutual respect, or will we descend 
into the destructive rivalries of the past? When nations 
find common ground — not simply based on power, but 
on principle — then we can make enormous progress. 
And I stand before the Assembly today committed to 
investing American strength and to working with all 
nations to address the problems we face in the twenty-
first century.

As we speak, America is deploying our doctors and 
scientists, supported by our military, to help contain 
the outbreak of Ebola and pursue new treatments. But 
we need a broader effort to stop a disease that could 
kill hundreds of thousands, inflict horrific suffering, 



destabilize economies and move rapidly across borders. 
It is easy to see that problem as a distant problem, 
until it is not. And that is why we will continue to 
mobilize other countries to join us in making concrete 
commitments, significant commitments to fight the 
outbreak and enhance our system of global health 
security for the long term.

America is pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the 
Iranian nuclear issue, as part of our commitment to stop 
the spread of nuclear weapons and pursue the peace 
and security of a world without them. But that can take 
place only if Iran seizes this historic opportunity. My 
message to Iran’s leaders and people has been simple 
and consistent: do not let this opportunity pass. We can 
reach a solution that meets Iran’s energy needs while 
assuring the world that Iran’s nuclear programme is 
peaceful.

America is and will continue to be a Pacific 
Power, promoting peace, stability, and the free flow 
of commerce among nations. But we will insist that 
all nations abide by the rules of the road and resolve 
their territorial disputes peacefully, consistent with 
international law. That is how the Asia-Pacific region 
has grown. And that is the only way to protect the 
progress going forward.

America is committed to a development agenda that 
eradicates extreme poverty by 2030. We will do our part 
to help people feed themselves, power their economies 
and care for their sick. If the world acts together, we 
can make sure that all of our children enjoy lives of 
opportunity and dignity.

America is pursuing ambitious reductions in 
its carbon emissions, and we have increased our 
investments in clean energy. We will do our part and 
help developing nations do theirs. But the science tells 
us that we can succeed in combating climate change 
only if we are joined in that effort by every other nation, 
by every major Power. That is how we can protect the 
planet for our children and our grandchildren.

In other words, on issue after issue, we cannot rely 
on a rule book written for a different century. If we lift 
our eyes beyond our borders, if we think globally and 
if we act cooperatively, we can shape the course of this 
century as our predecessors shaped the post-World War 
Two age.

But as we look to the future, one issue risks starting 
a cycle of conflict that could derail so much progress. 
That is the cancer of violent extremism, which has 
ravaged so many parts of the Muslim world. Of course, 
terrorism is not new. Speaking before the Assembly, 
President Kennedy put it well:

“Terror is not a new weapon. Throughout 
history it has been used by those who could not 
prevail either by persuasion or by example.” 
(A/PV.1013, para. 96)
In the twentieth century, terror was used by all 
manner of groups who failed to come to power through 
public support. But in this century, we have faced a 
more lethal and ideological brand of terrorists who have 
perverted one of the world’s great religions. With access 
to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, 
they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would 
divide the world into adherents and infidels — killing 
as many innocent civilians as possible and employing 
the most brutal methods to intimidate people within 
their communities.

I have made it clear that America will not base its 
entire foreign policy on reacting to terrorism. Instead, 
we have waged a focused campaign against Al-Qaida 
and its associated forces — taking out their leaders 
and denying them the safe havens they rely on. At the 
same time, we have reaffirmed again and again that the 
United States is not and never will be at war with Islam. 
Islam teaches peace. Muslims the world over aspire to 
live with dignity and a sense of justice. And when it 
comes to America and Islam, there is no us and them, 
there is only us, because millions of Muslim Americans 
are part of the fabric of our country.

So we reject any suggestion of a clash of 
civilizations. Belief in permanent religious war is the 
misguided refuge of extremists who cannot build or 
create anything and therefore peddle only fanaticism 
and hate. And it is no exaggeration to say that the future 
of humankind depends on our uniting against those 
who would divide us along the fault lines of tribe or 
sect, race or religion.

But this is not simply a matter of words. Collectively, 
we must take concrete steps to address the danger posed 
by religiously motivated fanatics and the trends that 
fuel their recruitment. Moreover, the campaign against 
extremism goes beyond a narrow security challenge. 
For while we have worked methodically to degrade 
Al-Qaida at its core and have supported a transition to 
a sovereign Afghan Government, extremist ideology 
has shifted to other places, particularly in the Middle 
East and North Africa, where a quarter of the young 



people have no job, where food and water could grow 
scarce, and where corruption is rampant and sectarian 
conflicts have become increasingly hard to contain.

As an international community, we must meet this 
challenge with a focus on four areas. First, the terrorist 
group known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) must be degraded and ultimately destroyed. It 
has terrorized all those whom it has come across in Iraq 
and Syria. Mothers, sisters and daughters have been 
subjected to rape as a weapon of war. Innocent children 
have been gunned down. Bodies have been dumped into 
mass graves. Religious minorities have been starved to 
death. In the most horrific crimes imaginable, innocent 
human beings have been beheaded, with videos of 
the atrocity distributed to shock the conscience of the 
world.

No god condones such terror. No grievance 
justifies such actions. There can be no reasoning or 
negotiation with that brand of evil. The only language 
understood by killers of that kind is the language of 
force. So the United States of America will work with 
a broad coalition to dismantle that network of death. In 
this effort, we do not act alone, nor do we intend to send 
United States troops to occupy foreign lands. Instead, 
we will support Iraqis and Syrians fighting to reclaim 
their communities. We will use our military might to 
roll back ISIL in a campaign of air strikes. We will train 
and equip forces fighting those terrorists on the ground. 
We will work to cut off their financing and stop the flow 
of fighters into and out of the region. And more than 
40 nations have already offered to join the coalition. 
Today, I ask the world to join in this effort. Those who 
have joined ISIL should leave the battlefield while they 
can. Those who continue to fight for a hateful cause 
will find that they are increasingly alone. For we will 
not succumb to threats, and we will demonstrate that 
the future belongs to those who build, not to those who 
destroy. So that is an immediate challenge, the first one 
we must meet.

The second challenge is that it is time for the 
world, especially Muslim communities, to explicitly, 
forcefully and consistently reject the ideology of 
organizations such as Al-Qaida and ISIL. It is one of 
the tasks of all great religions to accommodate devout 
faith with a modern, multicultural world. No children 
are born hating, and no children anywhere should be 
educated to hate other people. There should be no 
further tolerance of so-called clerics who call on people 
to harm innocents because they are Jewish or Christian 
or Muslim. It is time for a new compact among the 
civilized peoples of this world to eradicate war at its 
most fundamental source, and that is the corruption of 
young minds by violent ideology.

That means cutting off the funding that fuels such 
hatred. It is time to end the hypocrisy of those who 
accumulate wealth through the global economy and 
then siphon funds to those who teach children to tear 
it down. That means contesting the space that terrorists 
occupy, including the Internet and social media. Their 
propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad 
to fight their wars and has turned students — young 
people full of potential — into suicide bombers. We 
must offer an alternative vision. That means bringing 
people of different faiths together. All religions have 
been attacked by extremists from within at some point, 
and all people of faith have a responsibility to lift up the 
value at the heart of all great religions. Do unto your 
neighbour as you would do — as you would have others 
do — unto yourself.

The ideology of ISIL or Al-Qaida or Boko 
Haram will wilt and die if it is consistently exposed 
and confronted and refuted in the light of day. Look 
at the new Forum for Promoting Peace in Muslim 
Societies, whose purpose Sheikh Abdallah Bin Bayyah 
has described as “We must declare war on war, so 
the outcome will be peace upon peace”. Look at the 
young British Muslims who have responded to terrorist 
propaganda by starting the #notinmyname campaign, 
declaring that ISIL is hiding behind a false Islam. Look 
at the Christian and Muslim leaders who came together 
in the Central African Republic to reject violence; listen 
to the imam there who said that, while politics may try 
to divide the religious in that country, religion should 
not be a cause of hate, war, or strife.

Later today, the Security Council will adopt a 
resolution that underscores the responsibility of States 
to counter violent extremism. But resolutions must 
be followed by tangible commitments, so that we are 
accountable when we fall short. Next year, we should 
all be prepared to announce the concrete steps that 
we have taken to counter extremist ideologies in our 
own countries — by getting intolerance out of schools, 
stopping radicalization before it spreads and promoting 
institutions and programmes that build new bridges of 
understanding.

Thirdly, we must address the cycle of conflict, 
especially sectarian conflict, that creates the conditions 
that terrorists prey upon. There is nothing new about 



wars within religions. Christianity endured centuries of 
vicious sectarian conflict. Today it is violence within 
Muslim communities that has become the source 
of so much human misery. It is time to acknowledge 
the destruction wrought by proxy wars and terror 
campaigns between Sunni and Shia across the Middle 
East. And it is time that political, civic and religious 
leaders rejected sectarian strife. So let us be clear. This 
is a fight that no one is winning. A brutal civil war in 
Syria has already killed nearly 200,000 people and has 
displaced millions. Iraq has come perilously close to 
plunging back into the abyss. The conflict has created 
a fertile recruiting ground for terrorists, who inevitably 
export such violence.

The good news is that we also see signs that the tide 
can be reversed. We have a new, inclusive Government 
in Baghdad and a new Iraqi Prime Minister welcomed 
by his neighbours; we see Lebanese factions that reject 
those who try to provoke war. Such steps must be followed 
by a broader truce. Nowhere is that more necessary 
than in Syria. Together with our partners, America is 
training and equipping the Syrian opposition to be a 
counterweight to the terrorists of ISIL and the brutality 
of the Al-Assad regime. But the only lasting solution 
to Syria’s civil war is political — an inclusive political 
transition that responds to the legitimate aspirations of 
all Syrian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, regardless 
of creed.

Cynics may argue that such an outcome can never 
come to pass. But there is no other way for the madness 
in Syria to end, whether one year from now or 10. And it 
points to the fact that it is time for a broader negotiation 
in the region, in which major Powers address their 
differences directly, honestly and peacefully across 
the table from one another, rather than through gun-
wielding proxies. I can promise the international 
community that America will remain engaged in the 
region, and we are prepared to engage in that effort.

My fourth and final point is a simple one. The 
countries of the Arab and Muslim world must focus on 
the extraordinary potential of their people, especially 
the youth. And here I would like to speak directly to 
young people across the Muslim world. You come 
from a great tradition that stands for education, not 
ignorance; innovation, not destruction; the dignity of 
life, not murder. Those who call you away from that 
path are betraying that tradition, not defending it. You 
have demonstrated that when young people have the 
tools to succeed — good schools, education in math 
and science, an economy that nurtures creativity and 
entrepreneurship — then societies will flourish. So, 
America will partner with those who promote that 
vision.

Where women are full participants in a country’s 
politics or economy, societies are more likely to 
succeed. And that is why we support the participation of 
women in parliaments and peace processes, schools and 
the economy. If young people live in places where the 
only option is between the dictates of a State or the lure 
of an extremist underground, then no counterterrorism 
strategy can succeed. But where a genuine civil society 
is allowed to flourish — where people can express their 
views and organize peacefully for a better life — then 
you dramatically expand the alternatives to terror.

And such positive change need not come at the 
expense of tradition and faith. We see that in Iraq, where 
a young man started a library for his peers. “We link 
Iraq’s heritage to their hearts”, he said, and “give them 
a reason to stay”. We see it in Tunisia, where secular 
and Islamist parties worked together through a political 
process to produce a new constitution. We see it in 
Senegal, where civil society thrives alongside a strong 
democratic Government. We see it in Malaysia, where 
vibrant entrepreneurship is propelling a former colony 
into the ranks of advanced economies. And we see it in 
Indonesia, where what began as a violent transition has 
evolved into a genuine democracy.

Ultimately the task of rejecting sectarianism and 
rejecting extremism is a generational one, and a task 
for the people of the Middle East themselves. No 
external power can bring about a transformation of 
hearts and minds. But America will be a respectful 
and constructive partner. We will neither tolerate 
terrorist safe havens nor act as an occupying Power. 
We will take action against threats to our security and 
our allies, while building an architecture of counter-
terrorism cooperation. We will increase efforts to lift 
up those who counter extremist ideologies and who 
seek to resolve sectarian conflict. And we will expand 
our programmes to support entrepreneurship and civil 
society, education and youth, because ultimately those 
investments are the best antidote to violence.

We recognize as well that leadership will be 
necessary to address the conflict between Palestinians 
and Israelis. As bleak as the landscape appears, America 
will not give up on the pursuit of peace. Understand that 
the situation in Iraq and Syria and Libya should cure 
anybody of the illusion that the Arab-Israeli conflict 



is the main source of problems in the region. For far 
too long that has been used as an excuse to distract 
people from problems at home. The violence engulfing 
the region today has made too many Israelis ready to 
abandon the hard work of peace. And that is something 
worthy of reflection within Israel. Because let us be 
clear: the status quo in the West Bank and Gaza is not 
sustainable. We cannot afford to turn away from that 
effort — not when rockets are fired at innocent Israelis, 
or when the lives of so many Palestinian children are 
taken from us in Gaza. So long as I am President, we 
will stand up for the principle that Israelis, Palestinians, 
the region and the world will be more just and more 
safe with two States living side by side, in peace and 
security.

So this is what America is prepared to do: take 
action against immediate threats, while pursuing a 
world in which the need for such action is diminished. 
The United States will never shy away from defending 
our interests, but we will also not shy away from the 
promise of this institution and its Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights — the notion that peace is not merely 
the absence of war, but the presence of a better life.

I realize that America’s critics will be quick to point 
out that at times we too have failed to live up to our 
ideals and that America has plenty of problems within 
its own borders. That is true. In a summer marked by 
instability in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, I 
know the world also took notice of the small American 
city of Ferguson, Missouri, where a young man was 
killed and a community was divided. So, yes, we have 
our own racial and ethnic tensions. And, like every 
country, we continually wrestle with how to reconcile 
the vast changes wrought by globalization and greater 
diversity with the traditions that we hold dear.

But we welcome the scrutiny of the world, because 
what you see in America is a country that has steadily 
worked to address our problems, to make our union 
more perfect, to bridge the divides that existed at the 
founding of this nation. America is not the same as it 
was 100 years ago or 50 years ago or even a decade ago. 
We fight for our ideals and we are willing to criticize 
ourselves when we fall short. We hold our leaders 
accountable and insist on a free press and an independent 
judiciary. We address our differences in the open space 
of democracy, with respect for the rule of law, with a 
place for people of every race and every religion and 
with an unyielding belief in the ability of individual 
men and women to change their communities and their 
circumstances and their countries for the better.

After nearly six years as President, I believe that that 
promise can help light the world. I have seen a longing 
for positive change — for peace and for freedom and for 
opportunity and for an end to bigotry — in the eyes of 
young people whom I have met around the globe. They 
remind me that no matter who you are or where you 
come from or what you look like or what God you pray 
to or whom you love, there is something fundamental 
that we all share. 

Eleanor Roosevelt, a champion of the United 
Nations and America’s role in it, once asked, 

“Where, after all, do universal human rights 
begin? In small places, close to home — so close 
and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps 
of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual 
person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or 
college he attends; the factory, farm or office where 
he works.”
Around the world, young people are moving forward, 
hungry for a better world. Around the world, in small 
places, they are overcoming hatred and bigotry and 
sectarianism. And they are learning to respect each 
other, despite differences.
The people of the world now look to us, here, to 
be as decent and dignified and courageous as they are 
trying to be in their daily lives. And at this crossroads, 
I can promise the Assembly that the United States 
of America will not be distracted or deterred from 
what must be done. We are heirs to a proud legacy of 
freedom, and we are prepared to do what is necessary 
to secure that legacy for generations to come. I ask 
that the Assembly join us in this common mission, for 
today’s children and tomorrow’s.

It is a great honour for me to 
be here today. I would like to talk to the General 
Assembly about a subject that is at the heart of the 
United Nations — the pursuit of peace in an imperfect 
world. 
 War and conflict have been with us since the 
beginning of civilization. But in the first part of the 
twentieth century, the advance of modern weaponry led 
to death on a staggering scale. It was that killing that 
  
 
11-50692 10 
 
compelled the founders of this body to build an 
institution that was focused not just on ending one war, 
but on averting others; a union of sovereign States that 
would seek to prevent conflict while also addressing its 
causes. 
 No American did more to pursue that objective 
than President Franklin Roosevelt. He knew that a 
victory in war was not enough. As he said at one of the 
very first meetings on the founding of the United 
Nations, “We have got to make not merely peace, but a 
peace that will last”. 
 The men and women who built this institution 
understood that peace is more than the absence of war. 
A lasting peace — for nations and individuals — 
depends upon a sense of justice and opportunity; of 
dignity and freedom. It depends upon struggle and 
sacrifice; on compromise and on a sense of common 
humanity. 
 One delegate to the San Francisco Conference, 
which led to the creation of the United Nations, put it 
well: 
 “Many people have talked as if all we had to do 
to get peace was to say loudly and frequently that 
we loved peace and hated war. Now we have 
learned that no matter how much we love peace 
and hate war, we cannot avoid having war 
brought upon us if there are convulsions in other 
parts of the world”. 
 The fact is, peace is hard, but our people demand 
it. Over nearly seven decades, even as the United 
Nations helped avert a third world war, we still live in 
a world scarred by conflict and plagued by poverty. 
Even as we proclaim our love for peace and hatred of 
war, there are still convulsions in our world that 
endanger us all. 
 I took office at a time of two wars for the United 
States. Moreover, the violent extremists who drew us 
into war in the first place — Osama bin Laden and his 
Al-Qaida organization — remained at large. Today, we 
have set a new direction. 
 At the end of this year, America’s military 
operation in Iraq will be over. We will have a normal 
relationship with a sovereign nation that is a member 
of the community of nations. That equal partnership 
will be strengthened by our support for Iraq — for its 
Government and its security forces, for its people and 
their aspirations. 
 As we end the war in Iraq, the United States and 
our coalition partners have begun a transition in 
Afghanistan. Between now and 2014, an increasingly 
capable Afghan Government and security forces will 
step forward to take responsibility for the future of 
their country. As they do, we are drawing down our 
own forces, while building an enduring partnership 
with the Afghan people. 
 So let there be no doubt: the tide of war is 
receding. When I took office, roughly 180,000 Americans 
were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. By the end of 
this year, that number will be cut in half, and it will 
continue to decline. This is critical for the sovereignty 
of Iraq and Afghanistan, and to the strength of the 
United States as we build our nation at home. 
 Moreover, we are poised to end these wars from a 
position of strength. Ten years ago, there was an open 
wound and twisted steel; a broken heart in the centre of 
this city. Today, as a new tower is rising at Ground 
Zero, it symbolizes New York’s renewal, even as 
Al-Qaida is under more pressure than ever before. Its 
leadership has been degraded. Osama bin Laden, a man 
who murdered thousands of people from dozens of 
countries, will never endanger the peace of the world 
again. 
 Yes, this has been a difficult decade. But today 
we stand at a crossroads of history, with the chance to 
move decisively in the direction of peace. To do so we 
must return to the wisdom of those who created this 
institution.  
 The founding Charter of United Nations calls 
upon us, to unite our strength to maintain international 
peace and security. Article 1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights reminds us that, “All 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in 
rights”. Those bedrock beliefs — in the responsibility 
of States and the rights of men and women — must be 
our guide. 
 In that effort, we have reason to hope. This year 
has been a time of extraordinary transformation. More 
nations have stepped forward to maintain international 
peace and security. More individuals are claiming their 
universal right to live in freedom and dignity. 
 Think about it. One year ago, when we met here 
in New York, the prospect of a successful referendum 
in South Sudan was in doubt. But the international 
community overcame old divisions to support the 
 
 
11 11-50692 
 
agreement that had been negotiated to give South 
Sudan self-determination. Last summer, as a new flag 
went up in Juba, former soldiers laid down their arms, 
men and women wept with joy and children finally 
knew the promise of looking to a future that they will 
shape. 
 One year ago, the people of Côte d’Ivoire 
approached a landmark election. When the incumbent 
lost and refused to respect the results, the world 
refused to look the other way. United Nations 
peacekeepers were harassed, but they did not leave 
their posts. The Security Council, led by the United 
States, Nigeria and France, came together to support 
the will of the people. Côte d’Ivoire is now governed 
by the man who was elected to lead. 
 One year ago, the hopes of the people of Tunisia 
were suppressed. But they chose the dignity of 
peaceful protest over the rule of an iron fist. A vendor 
lit a spark that took his own life, but ignited a 
movement. In the face of a crackdown, students spelled 
out the word freedom. The balance of fear shifted from 
the ruler to those whom he ruled. Now the people of 
Tunisia are preparing for elections that will move them 
one step closer to the democracy that they deserve. 
 One year ago, Egypt had known one President for 
nearly 30 years. But for 18 days, the eyes of the world 
were glued to Tahrir Square, where Egyptians from all 
walks of life — men and women, young and old, 
Muslim and Christian — demanded their universal 
rights. We saw in those protesters the moral force of 
non-violence that has lit the world from Delhi to 
Warsaw, from Selma to South Africa — and we knew 
that change had come to Egypt and to the Arab world. 
 One year ago, the people of Libya were ruled by 
the world’s longest-serving dictator. But faced with 
bullets and bombs and a dictator who threatened to 
hunt them down like rats, they showed relentless 
bravery. We will never forget the words of the Libyan 
who stood up in those early days of the revolution and 
said, “Our words are free now”. It is a feeling one 
cannot explain. Day after day, in the face of bullets and 
bombs, the Libyan people refused to give back that 
freedom. And when they were threatened by the kind 
of mass atrocity that often went unchallenged in the 
past century, the United Nations lived up to its Charter. 
The Security Council authorized all necessary 
measures to prevent a massacre. The Arab League 
called for that effort. Arab nations joined a NATO-led 
coalition that halted Al-Qadhafi’s forces in their tracks. 
 In the months that followed, the will of the 
coalition proved unbreakable, and the will of the 
Libyan people could not be denied. Forty-two years of 
tyranny were ended in six months. From Tripoli to 
Misurata to Benghazi — today, Libya is free. 
Yesterday, the leaders of a new Libya took their 
rightful place beside us, and this week the United 
States is reopening our embassy in Tripoli. 
 This is how the international community is 
supposed to work — nations standing together for the 
sake of peace and security, and individuals claiming 
their rights. Now, all of us have a responsibility to 
support the new Libya and the new Libyan 
Government as they confront the challenge of turning 
this moment of promise into a just and lasting peace 
for all Libyans. 
 So this has been a remarkable year. The 
Al-Qadhafi regime is over. Gbagbo, Ben Ali and 
Mubarak are no longer in power. Osama bin Laden is 
gone, and the idea that change could come only 
through violence has been buried with him. Something 
is happening in our world. The way things have been is 
not the way that they will be. The humiliating grip of 
corruption and tyranny is being pried open. Dictators 
are on notice. Technology is putting power into the 
hands of the people. Youth are delivering a powerful 
rebuke to dictatorship and rejecting the lie that some 
races, some peoples, some religions and some 
ethnicities do not desire democracy. The promise 
written down on paper — “all human beings are born 
free and equal in dignity and rights” — is closer at 
hand. 
 But let us remember: Peace is hard. Peace is hard. 
Progress can be reversed. Prosperity comes slowly. 
Societies can split apart. The measure of our success 
must be whether people can live in sustained freedom, 
dignity and security. And the United Nations and its 
Member States must do their part to support those 
basic aspirations. And we have more work to do. 
 In Iran, we have seen a Government that refuses 
to recognize the rights of its own people. As we meet 
here today, men, women and children are being 
tortured, detained and murdered by the Syrian regime. 
Thousands have been killed, many during the holy time 
of Ramadan. Thousands more have poured across 
Syria’s borders. The Syrian people have shown dignity 
  
 
11-50692 12 
 
and courage in their pursuit of justice, protesting 
peacefully, standing silently in the streets and dying for 
the same values that this institution is supposed to 
stand for. And the question for us is clear: Will we 
stand with the Syrian people or with their oppressors? 
 Already, the United States has imposed strong 
sanctions on Syria’s leaders. We supported a transfer of 
power that would be responsive to the Syrian people. 
And many of our allies have joined in this effort. But 
for the sake of Syria — and the peace and security of 
the world — we must speak with one voice. There is 
no excuse for inaction. Now is the time for the Security 
Council to sanction the Syrian regime and to stand with 
the Syrian people. 
 Throughout the region, we will have to respond 
to the calls for change. In Yemen, men, women and 
children gather by the thousands in towns and city 
squares every day with the hope that their 
determination and spilled blood will prevail over a 
corrupt system. America supports those aspirations. We 
must work with Yemen’s neighbours and our partners 
around the world to seek a path that allows for a 
peaceful transition of power from President Saleh, and 
a movement to free and fair elections as soon as 
possible. 
 In Bahrain, steps have been taken towards reform 
and accountability. We are pleased with that, but more 
is required. America is a close friend of Bahrain, and 
we will continue to call on the Government and the 
main opposition bloc — al-Wifaq — to pursue a 
meaningful dialogue that brings peaceful change that is 
responsive to the people. We believe the patriotism that 
binds Bahrainis together must be more powerful than 
the sectarian forces that would tear them apart. It will 
be hard, but it is possible. 
 We believe that each nation must chart its own 
course to fulfil the aspirations of its people. America 
does not expect to agree with every party or person 
who expresses themselves politically, but we will 
always stand up for the universal rights that were 
embraced by this Assembly. Those rights depend on 
elections that are free and fair, governance that is 
transparent and accountable, respect for the rights of 
women and minorities, and justice that is equal and 
fair. That is what our people deserve. Those are the 
elements of peace that can last. 
 Moreover, the United States will continue to 
support, with greater trade and investment, those 
nations that transition to democracy, so that freedom is 
followed by opportunity. We will pursue deeper 
engagement with Governments, but also with civil 
society — students and entrepreneurs, political parties 
and the press. We have banned those who abuse human 
rights from travelling to our country and we have 
sanctioned those who trample on human rights abroad. 
And we will always serve as a voice for those who 
have been silenced. 
 Now, I know, particularly this week, that for 
many in this Hall, there is one issue that stands as a test 
of these principles and a test of American foreign 
policy, and that is the conflict between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians. 
 One year ago, I stood at this podium and I called 
for an independent Palestine. I believed then, and I 
believe now, that the Palestinian people deserve a State 
of their own, but what I also said is that a genuine 
peace can be realized only between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians themselves. One year later, despite 
extensive efforts by America and others, the parties 
have not bridged their differences. Faced with this 
stalemate, I put forward a new basis for negotiations in 
May of this year. That basis is clear. It is well known to 
all of us here. Israelis must know that any agreement 
provides assurances for their security. Palestinians 
deserve to know the territorial basis of their State. 
 I know that many are frustrated by the lack of 
progress; I assure them that I am too. But the question 
is not the goal that we seek. The question is: How do 
we reach that goal? And I am convinced that there is no 
shortcut to the end of a conflict that has endured for 
decades. Peace is hard work. Peace will not come 
through statements and resolutions at the United 
Nations. If it were that easy, it would have been 
accomplished by now. Ultimately, it is the Israelis and 
the Palestinians who must live side by side. Ultimately, 
it is the Israelis and the Palestinians — not us — who 
must reach agreement on the issues that divide them: 
on borders and on security, on refugees and on 
Jerusalem. 
 Ultimately, peace depends upon compromise 
among people who must live together long after our 
speeches are over, long after our votes have been 
tallied. That is the lesson of Northern Ireland, where 
ancient antagonists bridged their differences. That is 
the lesson of the Sudan, where a negotiated settlement 
led to an independent State. And that is and will be the 
 
 
13 11-50692 
 
path to a Palestinian State — negotiations between the 
parties. 
 We seek a future where Palestinians live in a 
sovereign State of their own, with no limit to what they 
can achieve. There is no question that the Palestinians 
have seen that vision delayed for too long. It is 
precisely because we believe so strongly in the 
aspirations of the Palestinian people that America has 
invested so much time and so much effort in the 
building of a Palestinian State and in the negotiations 
that can deliver a Palestinian State. 
 But understand this as well: America’s 
commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. Our 
friendship with Israel is deep and enduring. And so we 
believe that any lasting peace must acknowledge the 
very real security concerns that Israel faces every 
single day. 
 Let us be honest with ourselves: Israel is 
surrounded by neighbours that have waged repeated 
wars against it. Israel’s citizens have been killed by 
rockets fired at their houses and suicide bombs on their 
buses. Israel’s children come of age knowing that 
throughout the region other children are taught to hate 
them. Israel, a small country of less than 8 million 
people, looks out at a world where leaders of much 
larger nations threaten to wipe it off of the map. The 
Jewish people carry the burden of centuries of exile 
and persecution and fresh memories of knowing that 
6 million people were killed simply because of who 
they are. Those are facts. They cannot be denied. 
 The Jewish people have forged a successful State 
in their historic homeland. Israel deserves recognition. 
It deserves normal relations with its neighbours. And 
friends of the Palestinians do them no favours by 
ignoring that truth, just as friends of Israel must 
recognize the need to pursue a two-State solution with 
a secure Israel next to an independent Palestine. 
 That is the truth. Each side has legitimate 
aspirations, and that is part of what makes peace so 
hard. And the deadlock will be broken only when each 
side learns to stand in the other’s shoes and each side 
can see the world through the other’s eyes. That is 
what we should be encouraging. That is what we 
should be promoting. 
 This body — founded as it was out of the ashes 
of war and genocide, and dedicated as it is to the 
dignity of every single person — must recognize the 
reality that is lived by the Palestinians and the Israelis 
alike. The measure of our actions must always be 
whether they advance the right of Israeli and 
Palestinian children to live lives of peace and security 
and dignity and opportunity. And we will succeed in 
that effort only if we can encourage the parties to sit 
down, to listen to each other and to understand each 
other’s hopes and each other’s fears. That is the project 
to which America is committed. There are no shortcuts. 
And that is what the United Nations should be focused 
on in the weeks and months to come. 
 Even as we confront these challenges of conflict 
and revolution, we must also recognize — and we must 
also remind ourselves — that peace is not just the 
absence of war. True peace depends on creating the 
opportunity that makes life worth living. And to do 
that, we must confront the common enemies of 
humanity: nuclear weapons and poverty, ignorance and 
disease. Those forces corrode the possibility of lasting 
peace and together we are called upon to confront 
them. 
 To lift the spectre of mass destruction, we must 
come together to pursue the peace and security of a 
world without nuclear weapons. Over the past two 
years, we have begun to walk down that path. Since 
our Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., 
nearly 50 nations have taken steps to secure nuclear 
materials from terrorists and smugglers. Next March, a 
summit in Seoul will advance our efforts to lock down 
all of them. The New START Treaty between the 
United States and Russia will cut our deployed arsenals 
to the lowest level in half a century, and our nations are 
pursuing talks on how to achieve even deeper 
reductions. America will continue to work for a ban on 
the testing of nuclear weapons and the production of 
fissile material needed to make them. 
 And so we have begun to move in the right 
direction. And the United States is committed to 
meeting our obligations. But even as we meet our 
obligations, we have strengthened the treaties and 
institutions that help stop the spread of those weapons. 
And to do so, we must continue to hold accountable 
those nations that flout them. 
 The Iranian Government cannot demonstrate that 
its programme is peaceful. It has not met its obligations 
and it rejects offers that would provide it with peaceful 
nuclear power. North Korea has yet to take concrete 
steps towards abandoning its weapons and continues 
  
 
11-50692 14 
 
belligerent action against the South. There is a future 
of greater opportunity for the people of those nations if 
their Governments meet their international obligations. 
But if they continue down a path that is outside 
international law, they must be met with greater 
pressure and isolation. That is what our commitment to 
peace and security demands. 
 To bring prosperity to our people, we must 
promote the growth that creates opportunity. In this 
effort, let us not forget that we have made enormous 
progress over the past several decades. Closed societies 
gave way to open markets. Innovation and 
entrepreneurship have transformed the way we live and 
the things that we do. Emerging economies from Asia 
to the Americas have lifted hundreds of millions of 
people from poverty. It is an extraordinary 
achievement.  
 And yet, three years ago, we were confronted 
with the worst financial crisis in eight decades. And 
that crisis proved a fact that has become clearer with 
each passing year. Our fates are interconnected. In a 
global economy, nations will rise or fall together. 
 Today, we confront the challenges that have 
followed on the heels of that crisis. Around the world 
recovery is still fragile. Markets remain volatile. Too 
many people are out of work. Too many others are 
struggling just to get by. We acted together to avert a 
depression in 2009. We must take urgent and 
coordinated action once more. 
 Here in the United States, I have announced a 
plan to put Americans back to work and jump-start our 
economy, at the same time as I am committed to 
substantially reducing our deficits over time. 
 We stand with our European allies as they 
reshape their institutions and address their own fiscal 
challenges. For other countries, leaders face a different 
challenge as they shift their economy towards more 
self-reliance, boosting domestic demand while slowing 
inflation. So we will work with emerging economies 
that have rebounded strongly so that rising standards of 
living create new markets that promote global growth. 
That is what our commitment to prosperity demands. 
 To combat the poverty that punishes our children, 
we must act on the belief that freedom from want is a 
basic human right. The United States has made it a 
focus of our engagement abroad to help people to feed 
themselves. And today, as drought and conflict have 
brought famine to the Horn of Africa, our conscience 
calls on us to act. Together, we must continue to 
provide assistance and support organizations that can 
reach those in need. And together, we must insist on 
unrestricted humanitarian access so that we can save 
the lives of thousands of men and women and children. 
Our common humanity is at stake. Let us show that the 
life of a child in Somalia is as precious as any other. 
That is what our commitment to our fellow human 
beings demands. 
 To stop disease that spreads across borders, we 
must strengthen our system of public health. We will 
continue the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and 
malaria. We will focus on the health of mothers and of 
children. And we must come together to prevent and 
detect and fight every kind of biological danger — 
whether it is a pandemic like H1N1 or a terrorist threat 
or a treatable disease. 
 This week, America signed an agreement with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) to affirm our 
commitment to meeting that challenge. And today, I 
urge all nations to join us in meeting the WHO goal of 
making sure all nations have core capacities to address 
public health emergencies in place by 2012. That is 
what our commitment to the health of our people 
demands. 
 To preserve our planet, we must not put off action 
that climate change demands. We have to tap the power 
of science to save those resources that are scarce. And 
together, we must continue our work to build on the 
progress made in Copenhagen and Cancún, so that all 
the major economies represented here today follow 
through on the commitments that were made. Together, 
we must work to transform the energy that powers our 
economies and support others as they move down that 
path. That is what our commitment to the next 
generation demands. 
 To make sure our societies reach their potential, 
we must allow our citizens to reach theirs. No country 
can afford the corruption that plagues the world like a 
cancer. Together, we must harness the power of open 
societies and open economies. That is why we have 
partnered with countries across the globe to launch a 
new partnership on open Government that helps ensure 
accountability and helps to empower citizens. No 
country should deny people their rights to freedom of 
speech and freedom of religion, but also no country 
should deny people their rights because of whom they 
 
 
15 11-50692 
 
love, which is why we must stand up for the rights of 
gays and lesbians everywhere. 
 No country can realize its potential if half its 
population cannot reach theirs. This week, the United 
States signed a new declaration on women’s 
participation. Next year, we should each announce the 
steps we are taking to break down the economic and 
political barriers that stand in the way of women and 
girls. That is what our commitment to human progress 
demands. 
 I know there is no straight line to that progress, 
no single path to success. We come from different 
cultures, and carry with us different histories. But let 
us never forget that even as we gather here as Heads of 
different Governments, we represent citizens who share 
the same basic aspirations to live with dignity and 
freedom, to get an education and pursue opportunity, to 
love our families and love and worship our God, to live 
in the kind of peace that makes life worth living. 
 It is the nature of our imperfect world that we are 
forced to learn these lessons over and over again. 
Conflict and repression will endure so long as some 
people refuse to do unto others as we would have them 
do unto us. Yet that is precisely why we have built 
institutions like this — to bind our fates together, to 
help us recognize ourselves in each other — because 
those who came before us believed that peace is 
preferable to war, and freedom is preferable to 
suppression, and prosperity is preferable to poverty. 
That is the message that comes not from capitals, but 
from citizens, from our people. 
 When the cornerstone of this very building was 
put in place, President Truman came here to New York 
and said, “The United Nations is essentially an 
expression of the moral nature of man’s aspirations” — 
the moral nature of man’s aspirations. As we live in a 
world that is changing at a breathtaking pace, that is a 
lesson that we must never forget. 
 Peace is hard, but we know that it is possible. So, 
together, let us be resolved to see that it is defined by 
our hopes and not by our fears. Together, let us make 
peace — but a peace, most importantly, that will last.Nearly 66 years ago, in 
1946, one of my predecessors was privileged to 
represent Canada at the first session of the General 
Assembly. It is an honour to follow in those footsteps 
and to renew Canada’s commitment to the founding 
principles of the United Nations, namely, to maintain 
international peace and security; to prevent and 
remove threats to peace; to suppress acts of aggression; 
to respect the principle of equal rights and the self-
determination of peoples; to strengthen universal 
peace; and to promote and encourage respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. This 
Hall symbolizes the promise of humankind and what 
we can accomplish by working together to uphold 
those founding principles. 
 Yet, only a short distance from here is an entirely 
different symbol - ground zero. The date 9/11 was a 
stark reminder that evil exists, that life is fragile, that 
freedom has enemies, and that the poison of radical 
terrorism is all too real. It serves as a reminder that, as 
far as humankind has advanced, threats to peace, 
security and human dignity remain. 
 In that context, I wish to share reflections on 
three areas: first, the principles that motivate Canada’s 
approach to foreign policy; secondly, the basis for 
Canada’s support of multilateral organizations and 
multilateral action; and thirdly, a way forward for the 
United Nations. 
 The founding principles of these United Nations 
are more than mere words. It is our duty to pull them 
from the printed page, to breathe life into them and to 
practise them every day. In everyday practice, it is not 
easy to uphold principles. It requires struggle and 
sacrifice. Some pay the ultimate price. 
 The world remembers Secretary-General Dag 
Hammarskjöld, who was killed 50 years ago this 
month. We honour him for his integrity, his principles 
and for his great courage in confronting power. We also 
remember that it was Canada’s Prime Minister, John 
Diefenbaker, who, just a year earlier, stood at this very 
  
 
11-51390 30 
 
rostrum to respond to unjust attacks against him. 
Canada did not hesitate to defend the Office and the 
person of the Secretary-General. 
 That is the Canadian tradition — standing for 
what is principled and just, regardless of whether it is 
popular, convenient or expedient. Over the past 
century, the world was infected by a lethal combination 
of utopian ideology and brutal despotism that spawned 
totalitarian regimes that enslaved their own peoples. 
Apologists tried to persuade us that the ideology of 
Communism was benign. Canadians knew better. We 
took a stand for freedom and fundamental human 
rights. We stood against oppression in Germany and in 
Ukraine. We stood with its brave people, and those of 
the other captive nations of central and Eastern Europe. 
 Canada does not go along in order to get along. 
We will go along only if we go in a direction that 
advances Canada’s values: freedom, democracy, human 
rights and the rule of law. Also, Canada would not go 
along to support the farce of a major proliferator of 
nuclear arms presiding over the Conference on 
Disarmament. When North Korea relinquished the 
presidency, we resumed our engagement in the 
Conference. Canada’s tough economic sanctions 
against that rogue regime remain in place, and we 
continue to advocate and advance reform in how the 
President of that important body is selected. 
 We would not go along with appeasement of the 
former Al-Qadhafi regime, nor would we look the other 
way when the Lockerbie mass murderer received a 
hero’s welcome and the Colonel’s embrace. We would 
not look the other way as the Al-Qadhafi regime, 
blatantly disregarding human rights and the rule of law, 
waged war on the people of Libya. 
 Canada backs our principles with action: 
providing military support to NATO’s Operation 
Unified Protector; recognizing the National Transitional 
Council as Libya’s transitional Government; co-founding 
the Libya Contact Group; and giving early, strong and 
continuing support to the Libyan people’s struggle 
against tyranny. 
 Canada would not simply go along or look 
elsewhere when the Al-Assad regime started killing 
Syrian men, women and children in a despicable and 
desperate attempt to cling to power. We imposed tough 
sanctions on the regime and its backers. 
 Canada will not go along with a double standard 
that castigates some United Nations Members for 
alleged failings, while ignoring the notorious abuses of 
others. We supported the aspirations of those peoples 
who sought brighter futures for themselves and their 
countries during the Arab spring that has just passed. 
 However, we will not go along with the unilateral 
actions of the Palestinian Authority. Just a few days 
ago, the Quartet laid the foundation for a return to 
negotiation. Our Government’s position has been 
clear — the only solution to the issue is one that is 
negotiated by the two parties themselves. We continue 
to encourage both sides to accept those principles and 
to return to direct talks, based on a two-State solution, 
without delay or precondition.  
 We uphold Israel’s right to exist. We uphold its 
fundamental right, like any Member State, to defend 
innocent civilians against acts of terrorism. Just as 
Fascism and Communism were the great struggles of 
previous generations, terrorism is the great struggle of 
ours. Far too often, the Jewish State is on the front line 
in our struggle and its people are the victims of terror. 
 Canada will not accept or stay silent while the 
Jewish State is attacked for defending its territory and 
its citizens. The Second World War taught us all the 
tragic price of going along just to get along. It was 
accommodation and appeasement that allowed Fascism 
to gather strength. As Winston Churchill said, an 
appeaser is one who feeds a crocodile, hoping it will 
eat him last. 
 We respect State sovereignty, but Canada will not 
go along or look the other way when a minority is 
denied its human rights or fundamental freedoms. It is 
our common duty to uphold the rights of the afflicted 
and to give a voice to the voiceless.  
 As citizens of the global community, we have a 
solemn duty to defend the vulnerable, to challenge 
aggression and to protect and promote human rights 
and human dignity, at home and abroad: women, 
Christians, Baha’i and other victims of persecution in 
Iran; Roman Catholic priests, other Christian clergy 
and their laity, driven to worship underground in 
China; Christians being driven out of Iraq by Al-Qaida; 
and Copts being assaulted and killed in Egypt. In 
Burma, the regime discriminates against several forms 
of Buddhism and restricts the activities of Muslims. In 
other places, the Ahmadiyya community faces real 
violence. Gays and lesbians are threatened with the 
 
 
31 11-51390 
 
criminalization of their sexuality in Uganda, and other 
minorities are subjected to persecution, oppression or 
violence. Our nationalities are many but we share one 
humanity. 
 I am pleased to report that Canada will be 
creating an office of religious freedom within our 
Government at the heart of my own Department. The 
office will promote freedom of religion and of 
conscience as key objectives of Canadian foreign 
policy. The long history of humankind has proved that 
religious freedom and democratic freedom are 
inseparable. As Franklin Roosevelt observed on the eve 
of global war,  
 “[w]here freedom of religion has been attacked, 
the attack has come from sources opposed to 
democracy. Where democracy has been 
overthrown, the spirit of free worship has 
disappeared. And where religion and democracy 
have vanished, good faith and reason in 
international affairs have given way to strident 
ambition and brute force”.  
 That brings me to Canada’s support of 
multilateral institutions and multilateral action. Some 
years ago, a former Secretary-General referred to 
enlightened multilateralism as the guarantor, not the 
enemy, of State sovereignty and the integrity of State. 
State sovereignty is not created by multilateral 
institutions. Instead, multilateral institutions exist and 
derive legitimacy from the independent decisions of 
sovereign States. 
 Canada’s position in that regard was explained by 
our Prime Minister just last year. Referring to 
multilateral action to address the world economic 
crisis, Stephen Harper said that he saw world 
leadership, at its best, as a glimpse of a hopeful future 
where we act together for the good of all; the world we 
have been trying to build since 1945; the world we 
want for our children and for our grandchildren. It can 
be done if we act together.  
 Enlightened sovereignty, multilateral institutions 
and multilateral action result from a collection of 
sovereign decisions based on individual States’ own 
interests, not narrow self-interest in sovereignty’s 
name, but an expanded view of mutual interest in 
which there is room for all to grow and for all to 
prosper. Canada calls that enlightened sovereignty. It is 
the natural extension of enlightened self-interest. 
 As Canada’s Prime Minister noted when he 
addressed the General Assembly last year, the United 
Nations Charter is animated by “the idea that what is 
good for others may well be the best way to pursue 
one’s own interests” (A/65/PV.11, p. 46) — in other 
words, enlightened sovereignty. 
 The world knows that we can accomplish great 
things by working together. This year, collective action 
under United Nations sanction helped to limit the loss 
of life in Libya and ultimately ended a criminal, 
illegitimate regime’s war on the people whom it 
claimed to represent. Canada was tremendously proud 
to take part in its demise. Our Royal Canadian Air 
Force flew 10 per cent of the total strike sorties against 
Al-Qadhafi’s forces and our Royal Canadian Navy 
helped enforce the maritime blockade. 
 Canada has paid heavily, both in dollar terms and 
in a costly human toll, to fulfil our United Nations 
obligation to support the lawful Government of 
Afghanistan. We used our chairmanship of the Group 
of Eight to reach out to leaders from Africa and the 
Americas and to secure an agreement to enact the 
Muskoka Initiative for maternal, newborn and child 
health. 
 That progress will help to meet the Millennium 
Development Goal of reducing the appalling mortality 
among mothers and children in developing countries. 
Working with like-minded nations, Canada continues 
to make significant financial contributions towards 
peace, humanitarian assistance, development aid and 
security in the Sudans. Collective action does not mean 
uniformity. 
 For example, Canada works closely with like-
minded countries to advance human rights and 
democracy in Burma. At the same time, we imposed 
the toughest sanctions in the world against that 
country’s repressive military regime. Similarly, when 
Canada placed strong restrictions on Syria’s current 
regime, we acted independently, but in close 
consultation and cooperation with other nations. 
 In the defence of freedom and human rights, form 
cannot prevail over substance. The determinant is 
which route produces the best results. While 
multilateral action should be preferred, failure to 
achieve consensus must not prevent the willing from 
acting to uphold human rights and the founding 
principles of the United Nations. 
  
 
11-51390 32 
 
 Margaret Thatcher was once reported to have said 
that “consensus seems to be the process of abandoning 
all beliefs, principles, values and policies. So it is 
something in which no one believes”. That leads to my 
third topic — the challenges to the relevance and the 
effectiveness of this important Organization. 
 Canada has been a consistently reliable and 
responsible participant in United Nations initiatives 
around the world. We are the seventh largest 
contributor to United Nations finances. The citizens of 
the world deserve that the United Nations abide by the 
same principles observed by so many Governments of 
Member States: accountability, transparency and 
ethics; financial responsibility and fiscal austerity; 
efficiency and the elimination of waste and 
duplication; regular reviews to sunset unnecessary, 
redundant and obsolete mandates; and zero tolerance 
for conflicts of interest, fraud and corruption. 
 Yet, the challenges faced by this Organization 
extend beyond financial probity and operational 
effectiveness. This Organization is a forum for debate 
and dialogue, but it must also be a force for positive 
action to make the world a better place. As a former 
Canadian Prime Minister, John Diefenbaker, told this 
Assembly during his defence of the world’s persecuted 
minorities: “We are not here in this Assembly to win 
wars of propaganda. We are here to win victories for 
peace.” (A/PV.871, para. 225)  
 The relevance and effectiveness of the United 
Nations are imperilled when the founding principles 
are observed in word but not in deed. Such is the case 
when the presidency of the Conference on 
Disarmament passes to a regime involved in the illicit 
transfers of weapons, material and technology; or when 
Iran, which mocks the values of this Organization 
through such outrages as refusing to allow entry to  
 
United Nations observers on human rights, is permitted 
to seek leadership roles, such as the vice-presidency of 
the General Assembly and a seat on the Commission on 
Population and Development; or when objection is 
taken on petty, procedural or process-based grounds to 
reporting that speaks about credible allegations of war 
crimes committed in Sri Lanka; or when blatant 
violators of women’s rights are welcomed to the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women, often despite 
reservations that are incompatible with the object and 
purpose of the very Convention. 
 Canada has consistently opposed the debasement 
of multilateral institutions by conduct that is 
inconsistent with their values. For example, this year 
marks the fiftieth anniversary of Canada’s principled 
refusal to support membership in the Commonwealth 
of Nations by South Africa’s then apartheid regime. 
 The greatest enemies of the United Nations are 
not those who publicly repudiate its actions. The 
greatest enemies of the United Nations are those who 
quietly undermine its principles or, even worse, who sit 
idly, watching its slow decline. We cannot sit idly. 
 Canada is a vigorous defender of freedom, 
democracy and the rule of law. As our Prime Minister 
remarked earlier this month,  
 “we are not a country that makes war for gain or 
for territory. We do not fight for glory. If we 
covet honour, it is only a reputation for doing the 
right thing in a good cause”. 
 That is all. That is enough. If I may be so bold, 
that is why the countries of the world came together in 
the United Nations - to do the right thing in a good 
cause. The cause is peace, justice, freedom and 
opportunity for all.Last year, at the previous session [.2124th meeting], in my first address as Secretary of State, I spoke to this Assembly about American purposes. I said that the United States seeks a comprehensive, institutionalized peace, not an armistice. I asked other nations to join us in moving the world from detente to cooperation, from coexistence to community.
41.	In the year that has passed some progress has been made in dealing with particular crises. But many fundamental issues persist and new issues threaten the very structure of world stability.
42.	Our deepest problem going far beyond the items on the agenda is whether our vision can keep pace with our challenges. Will history recall the twentieth century as a time of mounting global conflict or as the beginning of a global conception? Will our age of interdependence spur joint progress or common disaster?
43.	The answer is not yet clear. New realities have not yet overcome old patterns of thought and action. Traditional concepts of national sovereignty, social struggle and the relation between the old and the new nations too often guide our course. And so we have managed but not advanced; we have endured but not prospered; and we have continued the luxury of political contention.
44.	This condition has been dramatized in the brief period since the twenty-eighth session. War has ravaged the Middle East and Cyprus. The technology of nuclear explosives has resumed its dangerous spread. Inflation and the threat of global decline hang over the economies of rich and poor alike.
45.	We cannot permit this trend to continue. Conflict between nations once devastated continents; the struggle between blocs may destroy humanity, ideologies and doctrines drawn from the last century do not even address, let alone solve, the unprecedented problems of today. As a result, events challenge habits; a gulf grows between rhetoric and reality.
46.	The world has dealt with local conflicts as if they were perpetually manageable. We have permitted too many of the underlying causes to fester unattended, until the parties believed that their only recourse was war. And because each crisis ultimately has been contained we have remained complacent. But tolerance of local conflict tempts world holocaust. We have no guarantee that some local crisis perhaps the next will not explode beyond control.
47.	The world has dealt with nuclear weapons as if restraint were automatic. Their very awesomeness has chained those weapons for almost three decades; their sophistication and expense have helped to keep constant for a decade the number of States which possess them. Now, as was quite foreseeable, political inhibitions are in danger of crumbling. Nuclear catastrophe looms more plausible, whether through design or miscalculation, accident, theft or blackmail.
48.	The world has dealt with the economy as if its constant advance were inexorable. While postwar growth has been uneven and some parts of the world have lagged, our attention has been focused on how to increase participation in a general advance. We continue to deal with economic issues on a national, regional or bloc basis at the precise moment that our interdependence is multiplying. Strains on the fabric and institutions of the world economy threaten to engulf us all in a general depression.
49.	The delicate structure of international cooperation, so laboriously constructed over the last quarter century, can hardly survive, and certainly cannot be strengthened, if it is continually subjected to the shocks of political conflict, war and economic crisis.
50.	The time has come, then, for the nations assembled here to act together in the recognition that continued reliance on old slogans and traditional rivalries will lead us towards a world ever more torn between rich and poor. East and West, producer and consumer; a world where local crises threaten global confrontation and where the spreading atom threatens global peril; a world of rising costs and dwindling supplies, of growing populations and declining production.
51.	There is another course. Last week before this Assembly [2234th meeting] President Ford dedicated our country to a cooperative,, open approach to build a more secure and more prosperous world. The United States will assume the obligations that our values and strength impose upon us. But the building of a cooperative world is beyond the grasp of any one nation. An interdependent world requires not merely the resources but the vision and creativity of us all. Nations cannot simultaneously confront and cooperate with one another.
52.	We must recognize that the common interest is the only valid test of the national interest. It is in the common interest, and thus in the interest of each nation, that local conflicts be resolved short of force and 'heir root causes be removed by political means; that the spread of nuclear technology be achieved without the spread of nuclear weapons; that growing economic interdependence lift all nations and not drag them down together.
53.	We will not solve these problems during this session, or during any one session, of the General Assembly, but we must at least begin to remedy problems, not just manage them; to shape events, rather that endure them; to confront our challenges instead of one another.
54.	The urgent political responsibility of our era is to resolve conflicts without war. History is replete with examples of the tragedy that sweeps nations when ancient enmities and the inertia of habit freeze the scope for decision. Equally, history is marked by brief moments when an old order is giving way to a pattern new and unforeseen. Those are times of potential disorder and danger but also of opportunity for fresh creation.
55.	We face such a moment today. Together let us face its realities. First, a certain momentum towards peace has been created, in EastWest relations and in certain regional conflicts. It must be maintained. But we are only at the beginning of the process. If we do not continue to advance, we will slip back. Second, progress in the negotiation of difficult issues comes only through patience, perseverance and a recognition of the tolerable limits of the other side. Peace is a process, not a condition. It can be reached only in steps. Third, the failure to recognize and grasp the attainable will prevent the achievement of the ideal. Attempts to resolve all issues at one time are a certain prescription for stagnation. Progress towards peace can be thwarted by asking too much as surely as by asking too little. Fourth, the world community can help resolve chronic conflicts, but exaggerated expectations will prevent essential accommodation among the parties. This Assembly can help or hinder the negotiating process. It can seek a scapegoat or a solution. It can offer the parties an excuse to escape reality or sturdy support in search of a compromise. It can decide on propaganda or contribute to realistic approaches responsive to man's yearning for peace.
56.	The Middle East starkly demonstrates those considerations. In the past year we have witnessed both the fourth ArabIsraeli war in a generation and the hopeful beginnings of a political process towards a lasting and just peace. We have achieved the respite of a ceasefire and two disengagement agreements, but the shadow of war remains. The legacy of hatred and suffering, the sense of irreconcilability have begun to yield however haltingly to the process of negotiation. But we still have a long road ahead.
57.	One side seeks the recovery of territory and justice for a displaced people. The other side seeks security and recognition by its neighbors of its legitimacy as a nation. In the end, the common goal of peace surely is broad enough to embrace all these aspirations.
58.	Let us be realistic about what must be done. The art of negotiation is to set goals that can be achieved at a given time and to reach them with determination. Each step forward modifies old perceptions and brings about a new situation that improves the chances of a comprehensive settlement.
59.	Because these principles were followed in the Middle East, agreements have been reached in the past year which many thought impossible. They were achieved, above all, because of the wisdom of the leaders of the Middle East who decided that there had been enough stalemate and war, that more might be gained by testing each other in negotiation than by testing each other on the battlefield.
60.	The Members of this body, both collectively and individually, have a solemn responsibility to encourage and support the parties in the Middle East on their present course. We have as well an obligation to give our support to the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East and elsewhere. The United States applauds their indispensable role, as well as the outstanding contribution of SecretaryGeneral Waldheim in the cause of peace.
61.	During the past year my country has made a major effort to promote peace in the Middle East. President Ford has asked me to reaffirm today that we are determined to press forward with these efforts. We will work closely with the parties and we will cooperate with all interested countries within the framework of the Geneve Conference.
62.	The tormented island of Cyprus is another area where peace requires a spirit of compromise, accommodation and justice. The United States is convinced that the sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be maintained. It will be up to the parties to decide on the form of government they believe best suited to the particular conditions of Cyprus. They must reach accommodation on the areas to be administered by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities as well as on the conditions under which refugees can return to their homes and reside in safety. Finally, no lasting peace is possible unless provisions are agreed upon which will lead to the timely and phased reduction of armed forces and armaments and other war material.
63.	The United States is prepared to play an even more active role now than in the past in helping the parties find a solution to the centuries old problem of Cyprus. We will do all we can, but it is those most directly concerned whose effort is most crucial. Third parties should not be asked to produce miraculous outcomes not anchored in reality. Third parties can encourage those directly involved to perceive their broader interests; they can assist in the search for elements of agreement by interpreting each side's views and motives to the other. But no mediator can succeed unless the parties genuinely want mediation and are ready to make the difficult decisions needed for a settlement.
64.	The United States is already making a major contribution to help relieve the human suffering of the people of Cyprus. We urge the international community to continue and, if possible, to increase its own humanitarian relief effort.
65.	The United States notes with particular satisfaction the continuing process of change in Africa. We welcome the positive demonstration of cooperation between old rulers and the new free. The United States shares and pledges its support for the aspiration of Africans to participate in the fruits of freedom and human dignity.
66.	The second new dimension on our agenda concerns the problem of nuclear proliferation.
67.	The world has grown so accustomed to the existence of nuclear weapons that it assumes they will never be used. But today technology is rapidly expanding the number of nuclear weapons in the hands of major Powers and threatens to put nuclear explosive technology at the disposal of. an increasing number of other countries.
68.	In a world where many nations possess nuclear weapons, dangers would be vastly compounded. It would be infinitely more difficult, if not impossible, to maintain stability among a large number of nuclear Powers. Local wars would take on a new dimension. Nuclear weapons would be introduced into regions where political conflict remains intense and the parties consider their vital interests overwhelmingly involved. There would, as well, be a vastly heightened risk of direct involvement by the major nuclear Powers.
69.	This problem does not concern one country, one region, or one bloc alone. No nation can be indifferent to the spread of nuclear technology; every nation's security is directly affected.
70.	The challenge before the world is to realize the peaceful benefits of nuclear technology without contributing to the growth of nuclear weapons or to the number of States possessing them.
71.	As a major nuclear Power, the United States recognizes its special responsibility. We realize that we cannot expect others to show restraint if we do not ourselves practice restraint. Together with the Soviet Union we are seeking to negotiate new quantitative and qualitative limitations on strategic arms. Last week our delegations reconvened in Geneva, and we intend to pursue these negotiations with the seriousness of purpose they deserve. The United States has no higher priority than controlling and reducing the levels of nuclear arms.
72.	Beyond the relations of the nuclear Powers to each other lies the need to curb the spread of nuclear explosives. We must take into account that plutonium is an essential ingredient of nuclear explosives and that in the immediate future the amount of plutonium generated by peaceful nuclear reactors will be multiplied many times. Heretofore the United States and a number of other countries have widely supplied nuclear fuels and other nuclear materials in order to promote the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This policy cannot continue if it leads to the proliferation of nuclear explosives. Sales of these materials can no longer be treated by anyone as a purely commercial competitive enterprise.
73.	The world community, therefore, must work urgently towards a system of effective international safeguards against the diversion of plutonium or its byproducts. The United States is prepared to join with others in a comprehensive effort.
74.	Let us together agree on the practical steps which must be taken to assure the benefits of nuclear energy free of its terrors. The United States will shortly offer specific proposals to strengthen safeguards to the other principal supplier countries. We shall intensify our efforts to gain the broadest possible acceptance of IAEA safeguards, to establish practical controls on the transfer of nuclear materials, and to ensure the effectiveness of these procedures. The United States will urge IAEA to draft an international convention for enhancing physical security against theft or diversion of nuclear material. Such a convention should set forth specific standards and techniques for protecting materials while in use, storage arid transfer. The Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], which this Assembly has endorsed, warrants continuing support. The Treaty contains not only a broad commitment to limit the spread of nuclear explosives but specific obligations to accept and implement IAEA safeguards and to control the transfer of nuclear materials.
75.	Whatever advantages seem to accrue from the acquisition of nuclear explosive technology will prove to be ephemeral. When Pandora's box has been opened, no country will be the beneficiary and all mankind will have lost. This is not inevitable.
If we act decisively now, we can still control the future.
76.	Let me now turn to our economic problems.
77.	Lord Keynes wrote:
'The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind. Very few of us realize with conviction the intensely unusual, unstable, complicated, unreliable, temporary nature of the economic organization.'
78.	The economic history of the postwar period has been one of sustained growth, for developing as well as developed nations. The universal expectation of our peoples, the foundation of our political institutions and the assumption underlying the evolving structure of peace are all based on the belief that this growth will continue.
79.	But will it? The increasingly open and cooperation global economic system that we have come to take tor granted is now under unprecedented attack. The world is poised on the brink of a return to the unrestrained economic nationalism which accompanied the collapse of economic order in the 1930s. And, should that occur, all would suffer: poor as well as rich, producer as well as consumer.
80.	So let us so longer fear to confront in public the facts which have come to dominate bur private discussions and concerns.
81.	The early warning signs of a major economic crisis are evident. Rates of inflation unprecedented in the past quarter century are sweeping developing and developed nations alike. The world's financial institutions are staggering under the most massive and rapid movements of reserves in history. And profound questions have arisen about meeting man's most fundamental needs for energy and food.
82.	While the present situation threatens every individual and nation, it is the poor who suffer the most. While the wealthier adjust their living standards, the poor see the hopes of a lifetime collapse around them. While others tighten their belts, the poor starve. While others can hope for a better future, the poor see only despair ahead.
83.	It can be in the interest of no country or group of countries to base policies on a test of strength, for a policy of confrontation would end in disaster for ail. Meeting man's basic needs for energy and food and assuring economic growth while mastering inflation require international cooperation to an unprecedented degree.
84.	Let us apply these principles first to the energy situation. Oil producers seek a better life for their peoples and a just return for their diminishing resources. The developing nations less well endowed by nature face the disintegration of the results of decades of striving for development as the result of a price policy over which they have no control. The developed nations find the industrial civilization built over centuries in jeopardy.
85.	Both producers and consumers have legitimate claims. The problem is to reconcile them for the common good. 
86.	The United States is working closely with several oil producers to help diversify their economies. We have established commissions to facilitate the transfer of technology and to assist with industrialization. We are prepared to accept substantial investments in the United States and we welcome a greater role for the oil producers in the management of international economic institutions.
87.	The investment of surplus oil revenues presents a great challenge. The countries which most need these revenues are generally the least likely to receive them. The world's financial institutions have coped thus far, but ways must be found to assure assistance for those countries most in need of it. And the full brunt of the surplus revenues is yet to come.
88.	Despite our best efforts to meet the oil producers' legitimate needs and to channel their resources into constructive uses, the world cannot sustain even the present level of prices, much less continuing increases. The prices of other commodities will inevitably rise in a never-ending inflationary spiral. Nobody will benefit. The oil producers will be forced to spend more for their own imports. Many nations will not be able to withstand the pace, and the poorer could be overwhelmed. The complex, fragile structure of global economic cooperation required to sustain national economic growth stands in danger of being shattered.
89.	The United States will work with other consumer nations on means of conservation and on ways to cushion the impact of massive investments from abroad. The preliminary agreement on a program of solidarity and cooperation signed a few days ago in Brussels by the major consumer countries is an encouraging first step.
90.	But the long range solution requires a new understanding between consumers and producers. Unlike food prices, the high cost of oil is not the result of economic factors, of an actual shortage of capacity or of the free play of supply and demand. Rather it is caused by deliberate decisions to restrict production and maintain an artificial price level. We recognize that the producers should have a fair share; the fact remains that the present price level even threatens the economic wellbeing of producers. Ultimately they depend upon the vitality of the world economy for the security of their markets and their investments. And it cannot be in the interest of any nation to magnify the despair of the least developed, which are uniquely vulnerable to exorbitant prices and have no recourse .but to pay.
91.	What has gone up by political decision can be reduced by political decision.
92.	Last week President Ford called upon the oil producers to join with consumers in defining a strategy which will meet the world's longterm need for both energy and food at reasonable prices; he set forth the principles which should guide such a policy; and he announced to this Assembly America's determination to meet our responsibilities to help alleviate another grim reality world hunger. At a time of universal concern for justice and in an age of advanced technology, it is intolerable that millions are starving and hundreds of millions remain undernourished.
93.	The magnitude of the longterm problem is clear. At present rates of population growth, world food production must double by the end of this century to maintain even the present inadequate dietary level and an adequate diet for all would require that we triple world production. If we are true to our principles, we have an obligation to strive for an adequate supply of food to every man, woman and child in the world. This is a technical possibility, a political necessity and a moral imperative.
94.	The United States is prepared to join with all nations at the World Food Conference in Rome to launch the truly massive effort which is required. We will present a number of specific proposals: to help developing nations, which have the lowest yields and the largest amounts of unused land and water and whose potential in food production must be made to match their growing need; to increase substantially global fertilizer production, for we must end once and for all the world's chronic fertilizer shortage; to expand international, regional and national research programs because scientific and technical resources mus? hi mobilized now to meet the demands of the year 2030 and beyond; to rebuild the world's food reserves, as our capacity for dealing with famine must be freed from the vagaries of weather; and to provide a substantial level of concessionary food aid. The United States will in the coming year increase the value of our own food aid shipments to countries in need. We make this commitment despite great pressures on our economy and at a time when we are seeking to cut our own Government's budget, because we realize the dimensions of the tragedy with which we are faced. All of us here have a common obligation to prevent the poorest nations from being overwhelmed and to enable them to build the social, economic and political base for self-sufficiency.
95.	The hopes of every nation for a life of peace and plenty rest on an effective international resolution of the crises of inflation, fuel and food. We must act now and we must act together.
96.	Let us never forget that all of our political endeavors are ultimately judged by one standard to translate our actions into human concerns.
97.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world where man's fears overshadow his hopes. We support the United Nations efforts in the fields of international law and human rights. We approve of the activities of the United Nations .in social, economic and humanitarian realms around the world. The United States considers the World Population Conference, held last month, the World Food Conference to be held a month from now and the continuing Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea of fundamental importance to our common future.
98.	In the coming months the United States will make specific proposals for the United Nations to initiate a major international effort to prohibit torture; a concerted campaign to control the disease which afflicts and debilitates over 200 million people in 70 countries schistosomiasis; and a substantial strengthening of the world's capacity to deal with natural disaster, especially the improvement of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator.
99.	We have long lived in a world where the consequences of our failures were manageable a world where local conflicts were contained, nuclear weapons threatened primarily those nations which possessed them, and the cycle of economic growth and decline seemed principally a national concern. But that is no longer the case. It is no longer possible to imagine that conflicts, weapons and recession will not spread.
100.	We must now decide. The problems we face will be with .us the greater part of the century. But will they be with us as challenges to be overcome or as adversaries that have vanquished us?
101.	It is easy to agree to yet another set of principles or to actions other nations should take. But the needs of the poor will not be met by slogans; the needs of an expanding global economy will not be met by new restrictions; the search for peace cannot be conducted on the basis of confrontation. So each nation must ask what it can do, what contribution it is finally prepared to make to the common good.
102.	Beyond peace, beyond prosperity, lie man's deepest aspirations to a life of dignity and justice. And beyond our pride, beyond our concern for the national purpose we are called upon to serve, there must be a concern for the betterment of the human condition. White we cannot, in the brief span allowed to each of us, undo the accumulated problems of centuries, we dare not do less than try. So let us now get on with our tasks.
103.	Let us act in the spirit of Thucydides that 'the bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it'.
I take great pleasure in joining speakers who have preceded me in congratulating the President on his election to that high office. My delegation is confident that under his wise guidance this twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly will create the climate necessary to deal with the new world outlook so many speakers have foreseen during this general debate.
69.	We are particularly aware of the leading role of the President's country in the non-aligned movement. Indeed, the initiative which Algeria took in calling for the special convocation of this Assembly earlier this year will be of signal importance to the work of this Organization in the months and years ahead. The aims of the non-aligned countries as enunciated by President Boumediene in this Hall at the sixth special session [2208th meeting] merit recollection as we commence our work: the emancipation of all peoples in the context of international co-operation based on the equality of States, respect for national sovereignty and the establishment of a just peace throughout the world. These are ideals to which we can all readily subscribe.
70.	The presence among us for the first time of the delegations from the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Grenada and the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, following the accession of those three States to membership, is evidence of the continued march of this world Organization towards universality. Canada was a sponsor of each of the three resolutions supporting their membership and we are confident that each of those countries will make a distinctive contribution to our work at this session and in the future.
71.	We in Canada have been deeply moved by the tragic aftermath of the hurricane which has devastated Honduras and surrounding regions. We heard this morning from the Foreign Minister of that country an appeal for international assistance. In this connexion the Government of Canada has decided to allocate $525,000 for emergency relief efforts in areas affected by this natural disaster.
72.	Some of the major political problems which faced the United Nations during its early years have now receded and no longer figure so prominently in its deliberations. In particular, the cold war is giving way to growing co-operation and detente.
73.	The last two decades have witnessed the resolute progress of peoples under colonial rule towards self-determination and independence. The past few months have seen particularly encouraging developments in the African Territories which have been or remain under Portuguese administration. Guinea-Bissau has now attained its independence and negotiations to the same end are under way with regard to Mozambique and Angola. It is a matter of satisfaction to all supporters of the United Nations that Portugal has agreed to work with the appropriate United Nations bodies in the process of decolonization. We in Canada welcome these developments and offer our encouragement to the Portuguese and African peoples concerned in their search for early equitable and peaceful solutions to remaining problems.
74.	Elsewhere, some fragile yet hopeful progress has been made in the past year towards settling certain of the regional conflicts that still exist. Lest we be lulled into an unrealistic sense of security, however, the recent events i' Cyprus serve to remind us how quickly a slowly simmering dispute can degenerate into a serious threat to international peace and security.
75.	If we have in the past months been reminded of the fragility of international peace and security, we have also come to realize the fragility of international monetary and trade relations. Accelerating rates of inflation and declining rates of growth, high interest rates and low stock prices, together with a widespread sense of unease, mark the problems facing the international economy. There is no doubt that the higher energy costs will require much more financing and in time massive adjustments on the part of those countries, both developed and developing, whose payments positions have been most severely affected.
76.	No people or government can of itself deal with the problems of inflation and unemployment, of trade imbalances and currency fluctuations. None will be immune if short-sighted and selfish policies lead to graver repercussions. These are not simply technical problems questions of currency flows, trade barriers, and exchange rates they are matters of human dignity. Unemployment, malnutrition, starvation and lack of shelter are an affront to all of us. We ignore them at the risk of our own welfare and security.
77.	A renewal and strengthening of international co-operation is an urgent requirement if we are to sustain social progress and economic development. We all have a responsibility to contribute to such co-operation. Those countries which command massive financial resources have, however, a special responsibility for seeing that such resources are invested in a helpful and constructive manner, and that their use strengthens, rather than disturbs, the health of the world economy.
78.	At the present time there is no more urgent development issue than the vigor of the world economy. When production and demand falter, all of us whether developed or developing suffer. Difficulties in the developed countries translate into distress in developing countries and something akin to disaster in the most seriously affected.
79.	If there are grounds for apprehension there are also signs of hope: some important steps have been taken in IMF towards a systematic and progressive reordering of the monetary system; the onset of a major trade negotiation appears to be drawing nearer; a number of industrialized countries have pledged themselves to exert their best efforts to avoid measures restrictive of trade in response to balance-of- payment difficulties.
80.	But much more still needs to be done. Development assistance should be maintained and, where possible, increased.. The responsible international institutions should be strongly supported. The habit of consultation should be strengthened.
81.	Those considerations will influence Canada's thinking at this session of the General Assembly, as at other international meetings. There are two such meetings to which I wish to draw special attention. This autumn, Governments will meet at the World Food Conference to adopt a program aimed at securing a sufficiency of food for all. Next year they will meet here in New York at the seventh special session, on development. The Canadian Government attaches great importance to the work of these conferences. We will exert our very best efforts to ensure their success.
82.	In seeking solutions to our political and economic problems we cannot forget that we face another pressing task: to ensure that human beings are alive to enjoy the improved circumstances that we are seeking for them.
83.	Our security is threatened more than ever today by developments in nuclear and conventional warfare. One of the most urgent problems of our time is how to bring the nuclear arms race under CGntrol in order to ensure international stability and the avoidance of nuclear war. The nuclear Powers have a direct responsibility for overcoming this grave problem. At the same time that we face-the immediate dangers of existing nuclear arsenals we are confronted as the Secretary-General has warned-— with a heightened risk of the wider dissemination of such arsenals. Here all States have a responsibility. Canada takes seriously its share of that responsibility.
84.	Specifically, the problem we face is to devise a system which will allow the dissemination of the benefits of nuclear energy without at the same time contributing to the spread of nuclear weapons. The international community has attempted to devise a system to cope with this problem. Canada has been very active in this endeavor. But the system could be strengthened further.
85.	We have developed a valuable system of nuclear power generation and we believe that nuclear power should not be withheld from those whose energy needs can best be met by this method. We are deeply committed to the cause of international development, but equally we are anxious to avoid contributing to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
86.	In addition to our requirements, and subject to security and resource limitations, we want to make our nuclear power generating system available to other countries. However, until more adequate internationally agreed measures are instituted, Canada intends to satisfy itself that any country using Canadian-supplied nuclear technology or material will be subject to binding obligations that the technology or material will not be used in the fabrication of nuclear explosive devices for whatever purpose. To that end Canada attaches special importance to the role of nuclear safeguards applied by IAEA.
87.	The need for truly effective anti-proliferation measures fully accepted and applied by the international community is now pressing. The nuclear technology involved is. no longer beyond the reach of a growing number c. countries. The costs of developing a nuclear explosive device are no longer prohibitive. The principal problem is to obtain the necessary materials. Every day more and more of these materials are being developed throughout the world and the problem of controlling their movement, as well as their use, is becoming proportionately greater.	
88.	The phenomenon of proliferation is, in political terms, something like a nuclear chain reaction. With the successful explosion of a nuclear device by each newcomer to the ranks of the nuclear Powers, greater grows the desire of other countries to 'go nuclear'. In a world without truly effective safeguards they feel their national existence threatened. If each new nuclear-weapon State prompted its neighbor to follow its example, all concerned would find their security quickly undermined.
89.	We believe that it is the very existence of nuclear explosive devices that presents the hazard to humanity and it increases in proportion to the number of countries possessing them. One net J make no distinction in terms of what countries possess such devices. The danger lies as much in the number of countries that have them, as in the policies of the possessors.
90.	If we are to avoid a nuclear catastrophe we must accept the fact that there are practical limits to the application of the principle of non-discrimination. The Canadian Government urges the international community to accept the obligation not to contribute to the uncontrolled spread of nuclear explosive capability, and the safeguards required to ensure compliance with that obligation.
91.	Our aim is to secure international measures which will halt both the multiplication and the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons, and which, will check the spread of the technology of nuclear explosive devices and the further development of that technology as applied to nuclear weapons. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the efforts to limit strategic arms, and the achievement of a comprehensive test ban are designed to achieve these objectives.
92.	As for the halting of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, all States should undertake not to transfer nuclear technology or materials except under inter-national supervision aimed at ensuring that the transfer is not used for fabricating nuclear explosive devices. In addition, all States should place the inventories of the nuclear fissile material that they hold for peaceful purposes under international supervision. Nuclear- weapon States should, as a first step towards this objective, place their peaceful nuclear facilities under this supervision and seek to halt their production of fissile material for weapons purposes. International supervision of fissile material is the best available means for .the international community to be assured of each State's peaceful intentions. This would allow States to concentrate on the development and distribution of much-needed nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
93.	The nuclear threat to our security may be dramatic and awe-inspiring but we cannot neglect the more prosaic and lethal threat from the use of conventional force. One of the few useful tools we have developed so far to deal with this problem is peacekeeping by a force sponsored by the United Nations. Canada has responded positively to United Nations requests and has engaged in virtually all the United Nations peace-keeping operations to date. This has not been without cost in livings of Canadians or of those from the forces of the other participating countries.
94.	Our interest is therefore obvious. There is no doubt in my mind that an overwhelming majority of Canadians continue to accept the importance and the usefulness of a United Nations peacekeeping role. But I would be less than candid if I did not admit that Canadians 'are today less inclined to accept in an unquestioning way the burdens of participation. Their concern springs mainly from the fact that peace-keeping endeavors often seem to do no more than perpetuate an uneasy status quo.
95.	If United Nations peace-keeping is to be fully effective, it must be accompanied by a parallel effort on the political level, especially by the parties most directly concerned, to convert the temporary peace that a peace-keeping force is asked to maintain into something more durable. If this is not done, and if those who contribute to peace-keeping are faced with indefinite prolongation of their hazardous tasks, I am afraid that Governments will be less willing to respond to future requests for troops.
96.	The past year has seen two new peace-keeping operations established in the Middle East and the Force in Cyprus reinforced. These developments were important in themselves, but they are also capable of teaching us lessons for the future. From the Canadian standpoint the operations in the Middle East are working effectively and are making an essential contribution to the maintenance of the ceasefire and disengagement agreements. But equally important, new principles have been established in the process. Participants have been drawn from a broader base than in the past, and a sounder financial foundation for the operations has been laid through a general assessment of the United Nations membership. These innovations have contributed to effective peacekeeping in the Middle East for the present, and will enhance the prospect of greater effectiveness in the future.
97.	There are fewer grounds for satisfaction in the case of Cyprus. There, despite the presence of United Nations peace-keeping forces, fighting has taken place on an unprecedented scale because the long-smoldering political problem remains unresolved. Moreover, it has been demonstrated once again in Cyprus that without the agreement and co-operation of the disputants the constructive role of a peace-keeping force is severely circumscribed. 
98.	If the usefulness of the United Nations in peace-keeping is to be maintained and expanded, new principles and techniques to strengthen it must be found. The machinery is at hand under the Charter to ensure an effective United Nations response to future peace-keeping needs. The advantages of agreement in advance on how United Nations peace-keeping should be directed and controlled are obvious. The experience of the United Nations Emergency Force could point the way to such agreement or to the formulation of guide-lines for peace-keeping operations under the overall authority of the Security Council, with a system of sharing responsibilities among the Security Council, the Secretary-General, the troop contributors, and the parties directly concerned in the field. This Organization can scarcely afford to neglect any instrument that might have a contribution to make in helping to defuse situations of armed conflict. It is the hope of the Canadian Government that Member States will continue to give this problem the attention it deserves.
99.	I have touched upon a few of the pressing political and economic problems that demand the attention of this Assembly. But I have dwelt upon two major problems of security: peace-keeping and the proliferation of nuclear explosive devices. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, a proliferation of nuclear explosive devices could help to . . create almost unimaginable dangers for the survival of our civilization and the human race.' [Al960llAdd.I, p. 7.] I do not therefore apologize for my preoccupation with these problems.
100.	I would not wish to conclude without paying tribute to the work of the Secretary-General and his staff at Headquarters and throughout the world in carrying forward the wide spectrum of tasks which challenge our Organization. In the introduction to the Secretary-General's report, he said the following:
'We are reminded every day of how thin the margin is between order and chaos, between sufficiency and desperate want, between peace and annihilation. If we wish to overcome the vast anxieties and uncertainties of our time, we have to make a conscious and concerted effort to change course and to make some , of our stated objectives\ into realities.' [Ibid., p. 9]
At this twenty-ninth session, the Canadian delegation pledges itself to work with all other delegations to move towards our common goals.
Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations it is worth reflecting on what the members of this body, working together, have helped to achieve. Out of the ashes of the Second World War, having witnessed the unthinkable power of the atomic age, the United States has worked with many nations in the Assembly to prevent a third world war — by forging alliances with old adversaries; by supporting the steady emergence of strong democracies accountable to their people and not to any foreign Power; and by building an international system that imposes a cost on those who choose conflict over cooperation, an order that recognizes the dignity and equal worth of all people.
That has been the work of seven decades. That is the ideal that this body has, at its best, pursued. Of course, there have been too many times when, collectively, we have fallen short of those ideals. Over the seven decades, terrible conflicts have claimed untold victims. But we have pressed forward, slowly, steadily, to make a system of international rules and norms that are better and stronger and more consistent.
It is that international order that has underwritten unparalleled advances in human liberty and prosperity. It is that collective endeavour that has brought about diplomatic cooperation among the world’s major Powers and buttressed a global economy that has lifted more than a billion people from poverty. It is those international principles that have helped constrain bigger countries from imposing their will on smaller ones and have advanced the emergence of democracy and development and individual liberty on every continent.
That progress is real. It can be documented in lives saved, agreements forged, diseases conquered and mouths fed. And yet we come together today knowing that the march of human progress never travels in a straight line, that our work is far from complete and that dangerous currents risk pulling us back into a darker, more disordered world.
Today we are seeing the collapse of strongmen and fragile States breeding conflict and driving innocent men, women and children across borders on an epic scale. Brutal networks of terror have stepped into the vacuum. Technologies that empower individuals are now also exploited by those who spread disinformation, suppress dissent or radicalize our youth. Global capital flows have powered growth and investment, but they have also increased the risk of contagion, weakened the bargaining power of workers and accelerated inequality.
How should we respond to those trends? There are those who argue that the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are unachievable or out of date, a legacy of a postwar era not suited to our own. In effect, they are arguing for a return to the rules that applied for most of human history and that predate this institution — the belief that power is a zero-sum game, that might makes right, that strong States must impose their will on weaker ones, that the rights of individuals do not matter and that in a time of rapid change, order must be imposed by force.
On that basis, we see some major Powers assert themselves in ways that contravene international law. We see an erosion of the democratic principles and human rights that are fundamental to this institution’s mission. Information is strictly controlled and the space for civil society restricted. We are told that such retrenchment is required to beat back disorder; that it is the only way to stamp out terrorism and prevent foreign meddling. In accordance with that logic, we should support tyrants like Bashar Al-Assad, who drops barrel bombs to massacre innocent children, because the alternative is surely worse.
This increasing scepticism of our international order can also be found in the most advanced democracies. We see greater polarization and more frequent gridlock, with movements on the far right, and sometimes the left, that insist on stopping the trade that binds our fates to other nations or calling for the building of walls to keep out immigrants. Most ominously, we see the fears of ordinary people being exploited through appeals to sectarianism, tribalism, racism or anti-Semitism; appeals to a glorious past before the body politic was infected by those who look different or worship God differently — a politics of us versus them.
The United States is not immune to this. Even as our economy is growing and our troops have largely returned from Iraq and Afghanistan, we see in our debates about America’s role in the world a notion of strength that is defined by opposition to old enemies, perceived adversaries — a rising China or resurgent Russia, a revolutionary Iran or an Islam that is incompatible with peace. We see arguments that the only strength that matters for the United States is bellicose words and shows of military force, and that cooperation and diplomacy will not work.
As President of the United States, I am mindful of the dangers that we face. They cross my desk every 
morning. I lead the strongest military that the world has ever known, and I will never hesitate to protect my country or our allies, unilaterally and by force where necessary. But I stand before the Assembly today believing in my core that we, the nations of the world, cannot return to the old ways of conflict and coercion. We cannot look backwards. We live in an integrated world, one in which we all have a stake in one another’s success.
We cannot turn back those forces of integration. No nation here in the Assembly can insulate itself from the threat of terrorism, the risk of financial contagion, the flow of migrants or the danger of a warming planet. The disorder we see is not driven solely by competition between nations or by any single ideology. If we cannot work together more effectively, we will all suffer the consequences.
That is true for the United States as well. No matter how powerful our military, how strong our economy, we understand the United States cannot solve the world’s problems alone. In Iraq, the United States learned the hard lesson that even with hundreds of thousands of brave, effective troops and trillions of dollars from our Treasury, it cannot by itself impose stability on a foreign land. Unless we work with other nations under the mantle of international norms, principles and law that offers legitimacy to our efforts, we will not succeed. And unless we work together to defeat the ideas that drive the various communities in a country like Iraq into conflict, any order that our militaries can impose will be temporary.
Just as force alone cannot impose order internationally, I believe in my core that repression cannot forge the social cohesion that nations need to succeed. The history of the last two decades proves that in today’s world, dictatorships are unstable. The strongmen of today become the spark of revolution tomorrow. You can jail your opponents, but you cannot imprison ideas. You can try to control access to information, but you cannot turn a lie into truth. It is not a conspiracy of United States-backed non-governmental organizations that exposes corruption and raises the expectations of people around the globe — it is technology, social media and the irreducible desire of people everywhere to make their own choices about how they are governed.
Indeed, I believe that in today’s world, the measure of strength is no longer defined by the control of territory. Lasting prosperity does not come solely from
the ability to access and extract raw materials. The strength of nations depends on the success of their people — their knowledge, innovation, imagination, creativity, drive and opportunity — and that, in turn, depends on individual rights, good governance and personal security. Both internal repression and foreign aggression are symptoms of a failure to provide that foundation.
Politics and solidarity that depend on demonizing others, that draw on religious sectarianism, narrow tribalism or jingoism, may at times look like strength in the moment, but over time their weakness will be exposed. And history tells us that the dark forces unleashed by this type of politics surely make all of us less secure. Our world has been there before. We gain nothing from going back.
Instead, I believe that we must go forward in pursuit of our ideals, not abandon them at this critical time. We must give expression to our best hopes, not our deepest fears. This institution was founded because men and women who came before us had the foresight to know that our nations are more secure when we uphold basic laws and norms and pursue a path of cooperation rather than conflict. And strong nations, above all, have a responsibility to uphold that international order.
Let me give a concrete example. After I took office, I made it clear that one of the principal achievements of the United Nations — the nuclear non-proliferation regime — was endangered by Iran’s violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. On that basis, the Security Council tightened sanctions on the Iranian Government, and many nations joined us to enforce them. Together, we showed that laws and agreements mean something. But we also understood that the goal of sanctions was not simply to punish Iran. Our objective was to test whether Iran could change course, accept constraints and allow the world to verify that its nuclear programme would be peaceful. For two years, the United States and our partners, including Russia and China, stuck together in complex negotiations. The result is a lasting, comprehensive deal that prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon while allowing it to access peaceful energy. If the deal is fully implemented, the prohibition on nuclear weapons is strengthened, a potential war is averted and our world is safer. That is the strength of the international system when it works the way it should.
That same fidelity to international order guides our responses to other challenges around the world.
Consider Russia’s annexation of Crimea and further aggression in eastern Ukraine. America has few economic interests in Ukraine, and we recognize the deep and complex history between Russia and Ukraine. But we cannot stand by when the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a nation is flagrantly violated. If that happens without consequence in Ukraine, it could happen to any of the nations gathered here today. That is the basis of the sanctions that the United States and our partners impose on Russia. It is not a desire to return to a cold war.
Now, within Russia, State-controlled media may describe those events as an example of a resurgent Russia — a view shared, by the way, by a number of United States politicians and commentators who have always been deeply sceptical about Russia and seem to be convinced that a new cold war is in fact upon us. And yet look at the results. The Ukrainian people are more interested than ever in aligning with Europe instead of Russia. Sanctions have led to capital flight, a contracting economy, a fallen rouble and the emigration of more educated Russians.
Imagine if, instead, Russia had engaged in true diplomacy and worked with Ukraine and the international community to ensure that its interests were protected. That would be better for Ukraine, but also better for Russia and better for the world, which is why we continue to press for this crisis to be resolved in a way that allows a sovereign and democratic Ukraine to determine its future and control its territory. This is not because we want to isolate Russia — we do not — but because we want a strong Russia that is invested in working with us to strengthen the international system as a whole.
Similarly, in the South China Sea, the United States makes no claim on territory there. We do not adjudicate claims. But like every nation gathered here, we have an interest in upholding the basic principles of freedom of navigation and the free flow of commerce, and in resolving disputes through international law, not the law of force. So we will defend those principles, while encouraging China and other claimants to resolve their differences peacefully. I say this while recognizing that diplomacy is hard, the outcomes are sometimes unsatisfying and it is rarely politically popular. But I believe that leaders of large nations in particular have an obligation to take those risks, precisely because we are strong enough to protect our interests if and when diplomacy fails.
I also believe that to move forward in this new era, we have to be strong enough to acknowledge when what we are doing is not working. For 50 years, the United States pursued a Cuba policy that failed to improve the lives of the Cuban people. We changed that. We continue to have differences with the Cuban Government. We will continue to stand up for human rights. But we address those issues through diplomatic relations, increased commerce and people-to-people ties. As those contacts yield progress, I am confident that our Congress will inevitably lift an embargo that should not be in place any more. Change will not come overnight to Cuba, but I am confident that openness, not coercion, will support the reforms and the better life that the Cuban people deserve, just as I believe that Cuba will find its success if it pursues cooperation with other nations.
Now, if it is in the interest of major Powers to uphold international standards, that is even more true for the rest of the community of nations. Look around the world. From Singapore to Colombia to Senegal, the facts show that nations succeed when they pursue an inclusive peace and prosperity within their borders and work cooperatively with countries beyond those borders.
That path is now available to a nation such as Iran, which, as of this moment, continues to deploy violent proxies to advance its interests. Those efforts may appear to give it leverage in disputes with its neighbours, but they fuel sectarian conflict that endangers the entire region and isolates Iran from the promise of trade and commerce. The Iranian people have a proud history and are filled with extraordinary potential. But chanting “Death to America” does not create jobs or make Iran more secure. If Iran chooses a different path, that will be good for the security of the region, good for the Iranian people and good for the world.
Of course, around the globe, we will continue to be confronted with nations that reject these lessons of history — places where civil strife, border disputes and sectarian wars give rise to terrorist enclaves and humanitarian disasters. Where order has completely broken down, we must act, but we will be stronger when we act together.
In such efforts, the United States will always do its part. We will do so mindful of the lessons of the past — not just the lessons of Iraq, but also the example of Libya, where we joined an international coalition
under a United Nations mandate to prevent a slaughter. Even as we helped the Libyan people bring an end to the reign of a tyrant, our coalition could have and should have done more to fill a vacuum left behind. We are grateful to the United Nations for its efforts to forge a unity Government. We will help any legitimate Libyan Government as it works to bring the country together.
We also have to recognize that we must work more effectively in the future, as an international community, to build capacity for States that are in distress before they collapse. That is why we should celebrate the fact that, later today, the United States will join with more than 50 countries to enlist new capabilities — infantry, intelligence, helicopters, hospitals, and tens of thousands of troops — to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. These new capabilities can prevent mass killing and ensure that peace agreements are more than words on paper. But we have to do it together. Together, we must strengthen our collective capacity to establish security where order has broken down and to support those who seek a just and lasting peace.
Nowhere is our commitment to international order more tested than in Syria. When a dictator slaughters tens of thousands of his own people, that is not just a matter of one nation’s internal affairs. It breeds human suffering on an order of magnitude that affects us all. Likewise, when a terrorist group beheads captives, slaughters the innocent and enslaves women, that is not a single nation’s national security problem. It is an assault on humankind as a whole.
I have said before and I will repeat: there is no room to accommodate an apocalyptic cult like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the United States makes no apologies for using our military, as part of a broad coalition, to go after them. We do so with a determination to ensure that there will never be a safe haven for terrorists who carry out these crimes. We have demonstrated over more than a decade of relentless pursuit of Al-Qaida that we will not be outlasted by extremists.
While military power is necessary, it is not sufficient to resolve the situation in Syria. Lasting stability can take hold only when the people of Syria forge an agreement to live together peacefully. The United States is prepared to work with any nation, including Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict. But we must recognize that after so much bloodshed, so much carnage, there cannot be a return to the pre-war status quo.
Let us remember how this started. Al-Assad reacted to peaceful protests by escalating repression and killing that, in turn, created the environment for the current strife. And so Al-Assad and his allies cannot simply pacify the broad majority of a population that has been brutalized by chemical weapons and indiscriminate bombing. Yes, realism dictates that compromise will be required to end the fighting and, ultimately, stamp out ISIL. But realism also requires a managed transition away from Al-Assad and to a new leader, and an inclusive Government that recognizes there must be an end to this chaos so that the Syrian people can begin to rebuild.
We know that ISIL — which emerged out of the chaos of Iraq and Syria — depends on perpetual war to survive, but we also know that they gain adherents because of a poisonous ideology. Part of our job, together, is to work to reject such extremism that infects too many of our young people. Part of that effort must be a continued rejection by Muslims of those who distort Islam to preach intolerance and promote violence. It must also involve a rejection by non-Muslims of the ignorance that equates Islam with terrorism.
This work will take time. There are no easy answers to Syria, and there are no simple answers to the changes that are taking place in much of the Middle East and North Africa. But so many families need help right now; they do not have time. That is why the United States is increasing the number of refugees whom we welcome within our borders. That is why we will continue to be the largest donor of assistance to support those refugees. Today we are launching new efforts to ensure that our people and our businesses, our universities and our non-governmental organizations can help as well, because in the faces of suffering families, our nation of immigrants sees itself.
Of course, in the old ways of thinking, the plight of the powerless, the plight of refugees, the plight of the marginalized did not matter. They were on the periphery of the world’s concerns. Today, our concern for them is driven not just by conscience, but should also be driven by self-interest. Helping people who have been pushed to the margins of our world is not mere charity; it is a matter of collective security. The purpose of this institution is not merely to avoid conflict; it is to galvanize the collective action that makes life better on this planet.
The commitments we have made to the Sustainable Development Goals speak to this truth. I believe that 
capitalism has been the greatest creator of wealth and opportunity that the world has ever known. But from big cities to rural villages around the world, we also know that prosperity is still cruelly out of reach for too many. As His Holiness Pope Francis reminds us, we are stronger when we value the least among these and see them as equal in dignity to ourselves and our sons and our daughters.
We can roll back preventable disease and end the scourge of HIV/AIDS. We can stamp out pandemics that recognize no borders. That work may not be on television right now, but as we demonstrated in reversing the spread of Ebola, it can save more lives than anything else we can do. Together, we can eradicate extreme poverty and erase barriers to opportunity. But this requires a sustained commitment to our people so farmers can feed more people, so entrepreneurs can start a business without paying a bribe, so young people have the skills they need to succeed in this modern, knowledge-based economy.
We can promote growth through trade that meets a higher standard, and that is what we are doing through the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a trade agreement that encompasses nearly 40 per cent of the global economy, an agreement that will open markets while protecting the rights of workers and protecting the environment that enables development to be sustained.
We can roll back the pollution that we put in our skies and help economies lift people out of poverty without condemning our children to the ravages of an ever-warming climate. The same ingenuity that produced the Industrial Age and the Computer Age allows us to harness the potential of clean energy. No country can escape the ravages of climate change. And there is no stronger sign of leadership than putting future generations first. The United States will work with every nation that is willing to do its part so that we can come together in Paris to decisively confront this challenge.
Finally, regarding our vision for the future of the Assembly, my belief in moving forward rather than backwards requires us to defend the democratic principles that allow societies to succeed. Let me start from a simple premise. Catastrophes like what we are seeing in Syria do not take place in countries where there is genuine democracy and respect for the universal values this institution is supposed to defend.
I recognize that democracy is going to take different forms in different parts of the world. The very idea of a people governing themselves depends upon government giving expression to their unique culture, their unique history, their unique experiences. But some universal truths are self-evident. No person wants to be imprisoned for peaceful worship. No woman should ever be abused with impunity, no girl should be barred from attending school. There should be freedom to peacefully petition those in power without fear of arbitrary laws. These are not ideas of one country or one culture. They are fundamental to human progress. They are a cornerstone of this institution.
I realize that in many parts of the world there is a different view — a belief that strong leadership must tolerate no dissent. I hear it not only from America’s adversaries, but — privately, at least — I also hear it from some of our friends. I disagree. I believe a Government that suppresses peaceful dissent is not showing strength. It is showing weakness and it is showing fear.
History shows that regimes that fear their own people will eventually crumble, but strong institutions built on the consent of the governed endure long after any one individual is gone. That is why our strongest leaders, from George Washington to Nelson Mandela, have elevated the importance of building strong, democratic institutions over a thirst for perpetual power. Leaders who amend constitutions to stay in office only acknowledge that they failed to build a successful country for their people, because none of us lasts forever. It tells us that power is something they cling to for its own sake rather than for the betterment of those whom they purport to serve.
I understand that democracy is frustrating. Democracy in the United States is certainly imperfect. At times it can be dysfunctional. But democracy — the constant struggle to extend rights to more of our people, to give more people a voice — is what allowed us to become the most powerful nation in the world. It is not simply a matter of principle; it is not an abstraction. Democracy, inclusive democracy, makes countries stronger. When opposition parties can seek power peacefully through the ballot, a country draws upon new ideas. When a free media can inform the public, corruption and abuse are exposed and can be rooted out. When civil society thrives, communities can solve problems that Governments cannot necessarily solve alone. When immigrants are welcomed, countries are 
more productive and more vibrant. When girls can go to school, get a job and pursue unlimited opportunities, that is when a country realizes its full potential.
That is what I believe is America’s greatest strength. Not everybody in America agrees with me. That is part of democracy. I believe that the fact that one can walk the streets of this city right now and pass churches and synagogues and temples and mosques where people worship freely; the fact that our nation of immigrants mirrors the diversity of the world — one can find people from everywhere here in New York City — the fact that in this country everybody can contribute, everybody can participate no matter who they are or what they look like or whom they love — that is what makes us strong.
I believe that what is true for America is true for virtually all mature democracies. That is no accident. We can be proud of our nations without defining ourselves in opposition to some other group. We can be patriotic without demonizing someone else. We can cherish our own identities — our religion, our ethnicity, our traditions — without putting others down. Our systems are premised on the notion that absolute power will corrupt, but that people, ordinary people, are fundamentally good and value family and friendship, faith and the dignity of hard work. And with appropriate checks and balances, Governments can reflect that goodness. I believe that is the future we must seek together — to believe in the dignity of every individual, to believe we can bridge our differences and choose cooperation over conflict. That is not weakness; that is strength. It is a practical necessity in our interconnected world.
Our people understand this. Think of the Liberian doctor who went door to door to search for Ebola cases and to tell families what to do if they show symptoms. Think of the Iranian shopkeeper who said after the nuclear deal, “God willing, now we will be able to offer many more goods at better prices”. Think of the Americans who lowered the flag over our embassy in Havana in 1961, the year I was born, and who returned this summer to raise that flag back up. One of those men said of the Cuban people, “We could do things for them, and they could do things for us. We loved them”. For 50 years we ignored that fact. Think of the families leaving everything they have known behind, risking barren deserts and stormy waters just to find shelter, just to save their children. One Syrian refugee who was met in Hamburg with warm greetings and shelter said,
“We feel there are still some people who love other people”.
The people of our United Nations are not as different as they have been told. They can be made to fear; they can be taught to hate, but they can also respond to hope. History is littered with the failure of false prophets and fallen empires who believed that might always makes right. That will continue to be the case. We can count on it. But we are called upon to offer a different type of leadership, a leadership strong enough to recognize that nations share common interests and people share a common humanity. And, yes, there are certain ideas and principles that are universal. That is what those who shaped the United Nations 70 years ago understood. Let us carry that faith forward into the future, for it is the only way we can ensure that the future will be brighter, for my children and for everyone’s children.I am honoured to appear before the Assembly today to deliver these remarks on behalf of the Government of Canada in this, the seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, Canada played a constructive role in drafting the Charter of the United Nations and creating the Organization before, during and after the 1945 San Francisco Conference. There can be little doubt that over the past seven decades, through the General Assembly, other United Nations bodies and the myriad
of agencies, funds and programmes associated with the United Nations, the Organization has often helped to improve the lives and prospects of people around the world. It has done so even as Member States and the United Nations itself have struggled to realize the Organization’s most fundamental aspirations. Since that time, Canada and Canadians have been steadfast supporters of the United Nations and deeply engaged in its work to deliver results for the benefit of our common future.
One of the ways in which the United Nations led the way in its early years, and in which it continues to light the path ahead, has been in the vital area of international development. Canada is proud to support, in word and deed, the commitments in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). The Organization and the international community it represents deserve our praise for aiming to eliminate poverty on a global scale. It is an objective that will require innovative new approaches and new partnerships. We will also need to promote fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and accountable governance in those parts of the world where the critical building blocks for sustainable development are weak or absent.
Canada looks forward to collaborating with others to sustain the momentum already underway as a result of the Millennium Development Goals and to move forward with renewed determination. The Government of Canada has identified maternal, newborn and child health as a priority for development, in support for which we have committed $3.5 billion over the next five years. There has been progress, to be sure, but there remains much to do. Canada welcomes the inclusion of maternal, newborn and child health in the 2030 Agenda as a means to follow through on the commitments made under the 2010 Group of Eight Muskoka Initiative, adopted at the Saving Every Woman, Every Child Summit, held in Toronto in 2014, and the renewed Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health.
As the international community commits to implementing the 2030 Agenda, one of the most critical questions we still face is how to finance the Sustainable Development Goals. While current official development assistance will retain its important role, current and projected levels fall well short of the trillions of dollars required to implement the Goals. We need to find new ways to blend financing from donors, foundations, the private sector and other sources to fill the gap.
15-29946 17/33

A/70/PV.28 03/10/2015
The Global Financing Facility (GFF) in support of Every Woman, Every Child is an excellent model of how the private sector can be brought on board to collaborate with national Governments to sustainably finance maternal, newborn and child health initiatives. The additional investment generated through the GFF and other innovative financing mechanisms will set the course for increasing funding from the current billions of dollars allocated for development finance to the trillions required if we want to achieve the post-2015 development agenda. Canada will continue to play a leading role in helping to establish those mechanisms to secure sustainable financing and leverage the expertise and resources of the private sector in support of the development outcomes.
Humanitarian assistance is even more important, as progress in development can be wiped out overnight by natural disasters, political violence and international conflicts or crises linked to acute food insecurity or the spread of disease. When considering the first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in May 2016, we all must strive to increase countries’ determination to respect international humanitarian law, to protect civilians and to strengthen resilience when faced with possible crises, in particular by ensuring that national Governments will be equipped to deal with those crises.
In responding to the needs of humankind, Canada always strives to act with generosity, speed and efficacy to save lives, to alleviate suffering and to preserve the dignity of the people most affected. In 2014, Canada increased by 32 per cent its financial contribution to humanitarian assistance in response to the ever-increasing needs in the world, especially for countries in crisis, such as Iraq, Syria, the Philippines, Ukraine, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Yemen. Similarly, Canada has played a leading role in the prompt and effective action by the international community to the Ebola epidemic in certain regions of West Africa.
As shown at numerous times in the past, Canada has the capacity and the will to assist and deal with the crisis of refugees and migrants currently affecting Europe. Since the establishment of the United Nations, the international community has been confronted with many situations brought about by the voluntary and involuntary displacement of people. In some cases, such as those of individuals trying to escape the crisis
in Syria, the issue is urgent. In others, it is part of a long-term phenomenon. We work in collaboration with our partners to address those difficulties, including by accelerating the resettlement process of Syrians and Iraqis in our own country this year.
We know that Canadians will support those efforts with the same spirit of generosity that has characterized the assistance they have provided when others were in distress and affected by disasters. However, we cannot stop there; we must also take on together human rights violations and promote stability, peace and prosperity in regions subjected to instability or violent conflicts. The United Nations, rooted in respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, was established specifically for that purpose.
Without the strong and collective commitment of all Member States to those principles, the edifying words of the Preamble to the Charter risk becoming simply hollow and meaningless words. In the words of the Prime Minister of Canada:
“Where human misery abounds, where grinding poverty is the rule, where justice is systematically denied, there is no real peace — only the seeds of future conflict.” (A/69/PV.11, p. 11)
Canada continues to support a wide range of initiatives and measures established by the United Nations to promote peace and security, including the most recent efforts to combat terrorism and to identify new ways to combat violent extremism.
Innocent civilians suffer the most in internal and international conflicts, as we see today in Iraq and Syria, where the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and other terrorist groups are sowing destruction. We are concerned by the resurgence of the Taliban in northern Afghanistan, by the scale of the ambition shown by Daesh and their expanding networks in South Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel, as well as by their subsidiaries, such as Boko Haram. The international community must continue to take significant steps to combat terrorism together.
Faced with that situation, Canada’s action includes not only its role in the military coalition that is fighting against the immediate threat posed by Daesh, but also efforts to provide humanitarian assistance. Canada will continue to support ethnic and religious minorities whose very existence is threatened.
18/33 15-29946

03/10/2015 A/70/PV.28
We are committed to drawing everyone’s attention to the consequences of sexual violence and other barbaric abuses perpetrated by ISIS against women and girls. Last July, we hosted the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, who presented graphic and detailed conclusions of her assessment mission to the Middle East to members of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, gathered in Quebec City. At that meeting, Canada announced an additional financial contribution for the survivors of abuses committed by Daesh and in support of the essential work being carried out by Ms. Bangura.
Canada has long been determined to work for the independence of women and girls and for greater respect for their rights in conflict situations. That is why we support a high-level review of the implementation of the programme on women and peace and security, as we have done for the past 15 years, that is, since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the first resolution on that issue. Canada has played a leading role in the global campaign to eliminate child marriage, early marriage and forced marriage, a widespread and harmful practice that threatens the lives and the future of girls around the world, with devastating consequences not only for them but also for their communities.
Our rules-based international system must be preserved. International guarantees lose their meaning if rules are flagrantly violated. We must face acute challenges to security and human rights, such as in Iraq and Syria, as well as the abuses that follow in the wake of acts of aggression, such as the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the illegal annexation of Crimea and the continued interference in eastern Ukraine. This rostrum must not be used by leaders to subvert the principles on which this Organization was established. This platform should be used to respond to, and tackle, these global threats.
Two countries that persistently violate international standards in this area and whose Governments oppress their own people and threaten their neighbours, as well as global peace are Iran and North Korea. Non-compliance over the course of decades raises questions about ambitions and intentions. Verbal pledges or paper promises are not enough. There must
be verifiable evidence of compliance and meaningful penalties for continued defiance.
In that regard, while we appreciate the efforts of the P5+1, the real test of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action concerning Iran, or any similar agreement, will be in its concrete implementation and independent verification. Actions speak louder than words. To that end, it is vital to support, sustain and, where necessary, enhance the monitoring capabilities of the relevant agencies, such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and ensure that verifiable deeds match conciliatory words. Nothing less than the credibility of the United Nations is at stake on such matters.
As with any organization, it is vital for the United Nations to reassess what it does and how it pursues its goals in the light of the remarkable changes since its founding. Canada wholeheartedly supports the high- level review of peace operations. We cannot always rely on the instruments of the past to deal with the crises of today.
Freedom, peace and stability pave the way to lasting prosperity. As we all know, the path to real sustainable development requires action at many levels and with many partners. Private-sector-led growth is a key ingredient for achieving that goal and for reducing poverty. Trade and investment are at the heart of that effort. That is why Canada is a firm supporter of a free and open trading system that fosters growth, contributes to development and supports poverty reduction in all regions of the world.
Perhaps no issue reminds us that we are all part of one world more than the threat to our collective well- being posed by climate change, a global challenge that requires global solutions. Canada takes the challenge of climate change seriously and is working with all parties under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to reach an effective post-2020 climate change agreement at the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention, to be held later this year in Paris. For Canada, an effective agreement must address both mitigation and adaptation, and, most importantly, such an agreement must include a commitment to mitigation actions by all of the world’s major emitters of greenhouse gases.
On 15 May, Canada announced its post-2020 climate change target — an economy-wide reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030. That is an ambitious target that is in line
15-29946 19/33

A/70/PV.28 03/10/2015
with other major industrialized countries and reflects our national circumstances, including Canada’s position as a world leader in clean electricity generation.
Canada recognizes that financing is a key part of the discussion and, moving forward with our partners, we will, as we have done in the past, continue to support international climate-change financing. Canada has already pledged $300 million to the Green Climate Fund, in addition to a previous investment of $1.2 billion that we provided under quick-start climate-change financing, which has supported a number of beneficial projects in more than 70 developing countries.
From the beginning, Canada has been one of the largest and most reliable financial contributors to the United Nations. In the light of that support, it should come as no surprise that the Government of Canada and Canadians expect that money to be spent wisely and that the United Nations should be held accountable for its expenditures.
As I said at the outset, the overarching aims of the United Nations since its creation have been remarkably consistent, namely, to help achieve greater prosperity and security, to advance mutual respect, fairness and good international conduct, and, ultimately, to inspire and sustain the hopes of people everywhere for a better future. With our friends and partners in the global community, we have striven to make this world a better place and to make the United Nations a better instrument for achieving those goals. We look forward to working together with other nations, as we have done for seven decades, in pursuit of that common purpose.
Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly
for this session.
Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished representatives and
guests, it is a great honour for me to address you and to
stand in this great Hall, which symbolizes so much of the
twentieth century - its darkest crises and its brightest
aspirations.
I come before you as the first American President born
after the founding of the United Nations. Like most of the
people in the world today, I was not even alive during the
convulsive world war that convinced humankind of the need
for this Organization, nor during the San Francisco
Conference that led to its birth. Yet I have followed the
work of the United Nations throughout my life, with
admiration for its accomplishments, sadness for its failures
and the conviction that, through common effort, our
generation can take the bold steps needed to redeem the
mission entrusted to the United Nations 48 years ago. I
pledge to you that my nation remains committed to helping
make the United Nations vision a reality.
The start of this session of the General Assembly offers
us an opportunity to take stock of where we are as common
shareholders in the progress of humankind and the
preservation of our planet. It is clear that we live at a
turning point in human history.
Immense and promising changes seem to wash over us
every day. The cold war is over. The world is no longer
divided into two armed and angry camps. Dozens of new
democracies have been born.
It is a moment of miracles. We see Nelson Mandela
stand side by side with President de Klerk proclaiming a
date for South Africa’s first non-racial elections.
We see Russia’s first popularly elected President,
Boris Yeltsin, leading his nation on its bold democratic
journey.
We have seen decades of deadlock shattered in the
Middle East as the Prime Minister of Israel and the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization reached
past enmity and suspicion to shake each other’s hand and
exhilarate the entire world with the hope of peace.
We have begun to see the doomsday weapons of
nuclear annihilation dismantled and destroyed. Thirty-two
years ago President Kennedy warned this Assembly that
humanity lived under a nuclear sword of Damocles that hung
by the slenderest of threads. Now the United States is
working with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and others to take
that sword down, to lock it away in a secure vault, where we
hope and pray it will remain for ever.
It is a new era in this Hall as well. The super-Power
standoff that for so long stymied the work of the United
Nations, almost from its first day, has now yielded to a new
promise of practical cooperation.
Yet today we must all admit that there are two
powerful tendencies working from opposite directions to
challenge the authority of nation States everywhere and to
undermine the authority of nation States to work together.
From beyond nations, economic and technological forces all
over the globe are compelling the world towards integration.
These forces are fuelling a welcome explosion of
entrepreneurship and political liberalization. But they also
threaten to destroy the insularity and independence of
national economies, quickening the pace of change and
making many of our people feel more insecure. At the same
time, from within nations, the resurgent aspirations of ethnic
and religious groups challenge Governments on terms that
traditional nation States cannot easily accommodate. These
twin forces lie at the heart of the challenges, not only to our
national Governments, but also to all our international
institutions. They require all of us in this Hall to find new
ways to work together more effectively in pursuit of our
national interests and to think anew about whether our
institutions of international cooperation are adequate to this
moment.
Thus, as we marvel at this era’s promise of new peace,
we must also recognize that serious threats remain. Bloody
ethnic, religious and civil wars rage from Angola to the
Caucasus to Kashmir. As weapons of mass destruction fall
into more hands, even small conflicts can threaten to take on
murderous proportions. Hunger and disease continue to take
a tragic toll, especially among the world’s children. The
malignant neglect of our global environment threatens our
children’s health and their very security. The repression of
conscience continues in too many nations. And terrorism,
which has taken so many innocent lives, assumed a
horrifying immediacy for us here when militant fanatics
bombed the World Trade Center and planned to attack even
this very Hall of peace.
Let me assure the Assembly that whether they be the
plotters of those crimes or the mass murderers who bombed
Pan Am flight 103, my Government is determined to see that
such terrorists are brought to justice.
At this moment of panoramic change, of vast
opportunities and troubling threats, we must all ask ourselves
what we can and what we should do as a community of
nations. We must once again dare to dream of what might
be, for our dreams may be within our reach.
For that to happen, we must all be willing honestly to
confront the challenges of the broader world. That has never
been easy. When this Organization was founded 48 years
ago, the world’s nations stood devastated by war or
exhausted by its expense. There was little appetite for
cooperative efforts among nations; most people simply
wanted to get on with their lives. But a far-sighted
generation of leaders from the United States and elsewhere
rallied the world. Their efforts built the institutions of post-
-war security and prosperity.
We are at a similar moment today. The momentum of
the cold war no longer propels us in our daily actions. And
with daunting economic and political pressures upon almost
every nation represented in this room, many of us are
turning to focus greater attention and energy on domestic
needs and problems, and we must.
But putting each of our economic houses in order
cannot mean that we shut our windows to the world. The
pursuit of self-renewal in many of the world’s largest and
most powerful economies - in Europe, in Japan, in North
America - is absolutely crucial, because unless the great
industrial nations can recapture their robust economic
growth, the global economy will languish. Yet the industrial
nations also need growth elsewhere in order to lift their own.
Indeed, prosperity in each of our nations and regions also
depends on active and responsible engagement in a host of
shared concerns: for example, a thriving and democratic
Russia not only makes the world safer, it also can help to
expand the world’s economy; a strong GATT (General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) agreement will create
millions of jobs world wide; peace in the Middle East,
buttressed as it should be by the repeal of outdated United
Nations resolutions, can help to unleash that region’s great
economic potential and calm a perpetual source of tension in
global affairs; and the growing economic power of China -
coupled with greater political openness - could bring
enormous benefits to all of Asia and to the rest of the world.
We must help our publics to understand this distinction:
domestic renewal is an overdue tonic; but isolationism and
protectionism are still poison. We must inspire our peoples
to look beyond their immediate fears towards a broader
horizon.
Let me start by being clear about where the United
States stands. The United States occupies a unique position
in world affairs today: we recognize that and we welcome
it. Yet, with the cold war over, I know many people ask
whether the United States plans to retreat or remain active
in the world; and if active, to what end? Many people are
asking that in our own country as well.
Let me answer that question as clearly and plainly as I
can. The United States intends to remain engaged and to
lead. We cannot solve every problem, but we must and will
serve as a fulcrum for change and a pivot point for peace.
In a new era of peril and opportunity, our overriding
purpose must be to expand and strengthen the world’s
community of market-based democracies. During the cold
war, we sought to contain a threat to the survival of free
institutions; now we seek to enlarge the circle of nations that
live under those free institutions.
For our dream is of a day when the opinions and
energies of every person in the world will be given full
expression, in a world of thriving democracies that cooperate
with each other and live in peace.
With this statement, I do not mean to announce some
crusade to force our way of life and doing things on others
or to replicate our institutions. But we now know clearly
that throughout the world, from Poland to Eritrea, from
Guatemala to South Korea, there is an enormous yearning
among people who wish to be the masters of their own
economic and political lives. Where it matters most and
where we can make the greatest difference, we will therefore
patiently and firmly align ourselves with that yearning.
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 9
Today, there are still those who claim that democracy
is simply not applicable to many cultures and that its recent
expansion is an aberration, an accident in history that will
soon fade away. But I agree with President Roosevelt, who
once said: 'The democratic aspiration is no mere recent
phase of human history. It is human history.'
We will work to strengthen the free market democracies
by revitalizing our economy at home, by opening world
trade through GATT, the North American Free Trade
Agreement and other accords, and by updating our shared
institutions, asking with you and answering the hard
questions about whether they are adequate to the present
challenges.
We will support the consolidation of market democracy
where it is taking new root, as in the States of the former
Soviet Union and all over Latin America, and we seek to
foster the practices of good government that distribute the
benefits of democracy and economic growth fairly to all
people.
We will work to reduce the threat from regimes that are
hostile to democracy and to support liberalization of
non-democratic States when they are willing to live in peace
with the rest of us. As a country that has over 150 racial,
ethnic and religious groups within our borders, our policy is
and must be rooted in a profound respect for all the world’s
religions and cultures. But we must oppose everywhere
extremism that produces terrorism and hate.
And we must pursue our humanitarian goals of
reducing suffering, fostering sustainable development and
improving health and living conditions, particularly for our
world’s children.
On efforts from export controls to trade agreements to
peace-keeping, we will often work in partnership with others
and through multilateral institutions such as the United
Nations. It is in our national interest to do so. But we must
not hesitate to act unilaterally when there is a threat to our
core interests or to those of our allies.
The United States believes that an expanding
community of market democracies not only serves our own
security interests, it also advances the goals enshrined in this
body’s Charter and its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
For broadly based prosperity is clearly the strongest
form of preventive diplomacy, and the habits of democracy
are the habits of peace. Democracy is rooted in
compromise, not conquest. It rewards tolerance, not hatred.
Democracies rarely wage war on one another. They make
more reliable partners in trade, in diplomacy, and in the
stewardship of our global environment. And democracies,
with the rule of law and respect for political, religious and
cultural minorities, are more responsive to their own people
and to the protection of human rights.
But as we work towards this vision, we must confront
the storm clouds that may overwhelm our work and darken
the march towards freedom.
If we do not stem the proliferation of the world’s
deadliest weapons, no democracy can feel secure.
If we do not strengthen the capacity to resolve conflicts
among and within nations, those conflicts will smother the
birth of free institutions, threaten the development of entire
regions and continue to take innocent lives.
If we do not nurture our people and our planet through
sustainable development, we will deepen conflict and waste
the very wonders that make our efforts worth doing.
Let me talk more about what I believe we must do in
each of these three categories: non-proliferation, conflict
resolution and sustainable development.
One of our most urgent priorities must be attacking the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - whether
nuclear, chemical or biological - and the ballistic missiles
that can rain them down on populations hundreds of miles
away.
We know this is not an idle problem. All of us are still
haunted by the pictures of Kurdish women and children cut
down by poison gas. We saw SCUD missiles drop during
the Gulf War that would have been far graver in their
consequences if they had carried nuclear weapons. And we
know that many nations still believe it is in their interests to
develop weapons of mass destruction or to sell them or the
necessary technologies to others for financial gain.
More than a score of nations likely possess such
weapons and their number threatens to grow. These
weapons destabilize entire regions. They could turn a local
conflict into a global human and environmental catastrophe.
We simply have got to find ways to control these weapons
and to reduce the number of States that possess them by
supporting and strengthening the International Atomic
Energy Agency and by taking other necessary measures.
10 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
I have made non-proliferation one of our nation’s
highest priorities. We intend to weave it more deeply into
the fabric of all of our relationships with the world’s nations
and institutions. We seek to build a world of increasing
pressure for non-proliferation but increasingly open trade and
technology for those States that live by accepted
international rules.
Today, let me describe several new policies that our
Government will pursue to stem proliferation. We will
pursue new steps to control the materials for nuclear
weapons. Growing global stockpiles of plutonium and
highly enriched uranium are raising the danger of nuclear
terrorism for all nations. We will press for an international
agreement that would ban production of these materials for
weapons for ever.
As we reduce our nuclear stockpiles, the United States
has also begun negotiations towards a comprehensive ban on
nuclear testing. This summer I declared that to facilitate
those negotiations, our nation would suspend our testing if
all other nuclear States would do the same. Today, in the
face of disturbing signs, I renew my call on the nuclear
States to abide by that moratorium as we negotiate to stop
nuclear testing for all time.
I am also proposing new efforts to fight the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons. Today,
only a handful of nations has ratified the chemical weapons
Convention. I call on all nations - including my own - to
ratify this accord quickly so that it may enter into force by
13 January 1995. We will also seek to strengthen the
biological weapons Convention by making every nation’s
biological activities and facilities open to more international
scrutiny.
I am proposing as well new steps to thwart the
proliferation of ballistic missiles. Recently, working with
Russia, Argentina, Hungary and South Africa, we have made
significant progress toward that goal. Now we will seek to
strengthen the principles of the Missile Technology Control
Regime by transforming it from an agreement on technology
transfer among just 23 nations into a set of rules that can
command universal adherence.
We will also reform our own system of export controls
in the United States to reflect the realities of the post-cold-
war world, where we seek to enlist the support of our former
adversaries in the battle against proliferation. At the same
time as we stop deadly technologies from falling into the
wrong hands, we will work with our partners to remove
outdated controls that unfairly burden legitimate commerce
and unduly restrain growth and opportunity all over the
world.
As we work to keep the world’s most destructive
weapons out of conflicts, we must also strengthen the
international community’s ability to address those conflicts
themselves. For as we all now know so painfully, the end
of the cold war did not bring us to the millennium of peace.
Indeed, it simply removed the lid from many cauldrons of
ethnic, religious and territorial animosity.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin has said that a wounded
nationalism is like a bent twig, forced down so severely that
when released, it lashes back with fury. The world today is
thick with both bent and recoiling twigs of wounded
communal identities. This surge of bitter conflicts has
placed high demands on the United Nations peace-keeping
forces. Frequently, the Blue Helmets have worked wonders.
In Namibia, El Salvador, the Golan Heights and elsewhere,
United Nations peace-keepers have helped to stop the
fighting, restore civil authority and enable free elections. In
Bosnia, United Nations peace-keepers, against the danger
and frustration of that continuing tragedy, have maintained
a valiant humanitarian effort. And if the parties to that
conflict take the hard steps needed to make a real peace, the
international community - including the United States - must
be ready to help in its effective implementation.
In Somalia, the United States and the United Nations
have worked together to achieve a stunning humanitarian
rescue, saving literally hundreds of thousands of lives and
restoring conditions of security to almost the entire country.
United Nations peace-keepers from over two dozen nations
remain in Somalia today - and some, including brave
Americans, have lost their lives - to ensure that we complete
our mission and that anarchy and starvation do not return
just as quickly as they were abolished.
Many still criticize United Nations peace-keeping, but
those who do should talk to the people of Cambodia, where
the United Nations operations helped turn the killing fields
into fertile soil for reconciliation. Last May’s elections in
Cambodia marked a proud accomplishment for that war--
weary nation and for the United Nations. And I am pleased
to announce that the United States has recognized
Cambodia’s new Government.
United Nations peace-keeping holds the promise to
resolve many of this era’s conflicts. But the reason we have
supported such missions is not, as some critics in the United
States have charged, to subcontract American foreign policy,
but to strengthen our security, to protect our interests, and to
Forty-eighth session - 27 September l993 11
share among nations the costs and effort of pursuing peace.
Peace-keeping cannot be a substitute for our own national
defence efforts, but it can strongly supplement them.
Today there is wide recognition that the United Nations
peace-keeping ability has not kept pace with its rising
responsibilities and challenges. Just six years ago, about
10,000 United Nations peace-keepers were stationed around
the world. Today the United Nations has some 80,000
deployed in 17 operations on four continents. Yet until
recently, if a peace-keeping commander called in from
across the globe when it was night-time here in New York,
there was no one in the peace-keeping office even to answer
the call. When lives are on the line, we cannot let the reach
of the United Nations exceed its grasp.
As the Secretary-General and others have argued, if
United Nations peace-keeping is to be a sound security
investment for our nation and for other United Nations
Members, it must adapt to new times. Together, we must
prepare United Nations peace-keeping for the twenty-first
century. We need to begin by bringing the rigours of
military and political analysis to every United Nations peace
mission. In recent weeks in the Security Council, our nation
has begun asking harder questions about proposals for new
peace-keeping missions. Is there a real threat to
international peace? Does the proposed mission have clear
objectives? Can an end point be identified for those who
will be asked to participate? How much will the mission
cost? From now on the United Nations should address these
and other questions for every proposed mission before we
vote and before the mission begins. The United Nations
simply cannot become engaged in every one of the world’s
conflicts. If the American people are to say 'Yes' to United
Nations peace-keeping, the United Nations must know when
to say 'No'.
The United Nations also must have the technical means
to run a modern, world-class peace-keeping operation. We
support the creation of a genuine United Nations peace-
keeping headquarters with a planning staff; with access to
timely intelligence; with a logistics unit that can be deployed
on a moment’s notice; and with a modern operations centre
with global communications.
United Nations operations must not only be adequately
funded but also fairly funded. Within the next few weeks,
the United States will be current on our peace-keeping bills.
I have worked hard with the Congress to get this done. I
believe the United States should lead the way in being
timely in its payments, and I will work to ensure that we
continue to pay our peace-keeping bills in full. But I am
also committed to working with the United Nations to reduce
our nation’s assessment for these missions. The assessment
system has not been changed since 1973, and everyone in
our country knows that our percentage of the world’s
economic pie is not as great as it was then. Therefore, I
believe our rate should be reduced to reflect the rise of other
nations that can now bear more of the financial burden.
That will make it easier for me as President to make sure
my country pays in a timely and full fashion.
Changes in the United Nations peace-keeping operations
must be part of an even broader programme of United
Nations reform. I say that, again, not to criticize the United
Nations but to help improve it. As our Ambassador,
Madeleine Albright, has suggested, the United States has
always played a twin role in regard to the United Nations:
'First friend and first critic.'
Today, corporations around the world are finding ways
to move from the industrial age into the information age -
improving service, reducing bureaucracy and cutting costs.
Here in the United States, Vice President Al Gore and I have
launched an effort literally to reinvent how our Government
operates. We see this going on in other Governments
around the world. Now the time has come to reinvent the
way the United Nations operates as well.
I applaud the initial steps the Secretary-General has
taken to reduce and reform the United Nations bureaucracy.
Now we must all do even more to root out waste. Before
this General Assembly is over, let us establish a strong
mandate for an office of inspector general, so that it can
attain a reputation for toughness, for integrity, for
effectiveness. Let us build new confidence among our
people that the United Nations is changing with the needs of
our times.
Ultimately, the key for reforming the United Nations,
as for reforming our own government, is to remember why
we are here and whom we serve. It is well to recall that the
first words of the United Nations Charter are not, 'We the
Governments', but 'We the peoples of the United Nations'.
That means, in every country, the teachers, the workers, the
farmers, the professionals, the fathers, the mothers, the
children, from the most remote village in the world to the
largest metropolis - they are why we gather in this great
Hall; it is their futures that are at risk when we act or fail to
act; and it is they who ultimately pay our bills.
As we dream new dreams in this age when miracles
seem possible, let us focus on the lives of those people, and
especially on the children who will inherit this world. Let
12 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
us work with a new urgency, and imagine what kind of
world we could create for them over the coming generation.
Let us work with new energy to protect the world’s
people from torture and repression. As Secretary of State
Christopher stressed at the recent Vienna Conference, human
rights are not something conditional, bounded by culture but,
rather, something universal, granted by God. This General
Assembly should create, at long last, a high commissioner
for human rights. I hope it will do this soon, and with
vigour and energy and conviction.
Let us also work far more ambitiously to fulfil our
obligations as custodians of this planet, not only to improve
the quality of life for our citizens and the quality of our air,
water and the earth itself, but also because the roots of
conflict are so often entangled with the roots of
environmental neglect and the calamities of famine and
disease.
During the course of our campaign in the United States
last year, Vice President Gore and I promised the American
people major changes in our nation’s policy towards the
global environment. Those were promises to keep, and
today the United States is doing so. Today we are working
with other nations to build on the promising work of the
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development.
We are working to make sure that all nations meet their
commitments under the global climate Convention. We are
seeking to complete negotiations on an accord to prevent the
world’s deserts from further expanding. And we seek to
strengthen the World Health Organization’s efforts to combat
the plague of AIDS, which is not only killing millions, but
also exhausting the resources of the nations that can least
afford it.
And let us make a new commitment to the world’s
children. It is tragic enough that one and a half million
children have died as a result of wars over the past decade.
But it is far more unforgivable that during that same period
40 million children have died from diseases completely
preventable with simple vaccines or medicines. Every day
- this day, as we meet here - over 30,000 of the world’s
children will die of malnutrition and disease. As the
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
Jim Grant, has reminded me, 'each of [those children] had
a name and a nationality, a family, a personality and a
potential'.
We are compelled to do better by the world’s children.
Just as our own nation has launched new reforms to ensure
that every child has adequate health care, we must do more
to get basic vaccines and other treatments for curable
diseases to children all over the world. It’s the best
investment we’ll ever make. We can find new ways to
ensure that every child grows up with clean, drinkable water
- that most precious commodity of life itself. And the
United Nations can work even harder to ensure that each
child has at least a full primary education - and I mean that
opportunity for girls as well as boys.
To ensure a healthier and more abundant world, we
simply must slow the world’s explosive growth in
population. We cannot afford to see the human race double
by the middle of the next century. Our nation has at last
renewed its commitment to work with the United Nations to
expand the availability of the world’s family planning
education and services. We must ensure that there is a place
at the table for every one of the world’s children. We can
do this.
At the birth of this Organization, 48 years ago - another
time of both victory and danger - a generation of gifted
leaders from many nations stepped forward to organize the
world’s efforts on behalf of security and prosperity. One
American leader during that period said this: 'It is time we
steered by the stars rather than by the light of each passing
ship.' His generation picked peace, human dignity and
freedom. Those are good stars. They should remain the
highest in our firmament.
Now history has granted to us a moment of even
greater opportunity, when old dangers are ebbing and old
walls are crumbling. Future generations will judge us, every
one of us, above all by what we make of this magic
moment. Let us resolve that we will dream larger, that we
will work harder, so that they can conclude that we did not
merely turn walls to rubble, but instead laid the foundations
for great things to come.
Let us ensure that the tide of freedom and democracy
is not pushed back by the fierce winds of ethnic hatred. Let
us ensure that the world’s most dangerous weapons are
safely reduced and denied to dangerous hands. Let us
ensure that the world we pass to our children is healthier,
safer and more abundant than the one we inhabit today. I
believe - I know - that together we can extend this moment
of miracles into an age of great works and new wonders.It has been an
extraordinary year since the General Assembly met last year.
We have seen breakthroughs in two areas - South Africa and
the Middle East - which have bedevilled the international
community for decades. Bringing both to a successful
conclusion will be hard, but we have good reasons for
optimism. Canada applauds the courage and foresight of the
parties involved, and pledges that it will continue to do its
part in promoting further advances.
But, at the same time, we have also seen tragedies - in
Somalia, Bosnia, Angola and elsewhere - which have, thus
far, defied our best efforts to bring peace.
It is against this background, of hope renewed and
hopes dashed, that I wish to speak about the United Nations
central vocation: the defence and promotion of peace and
security and the conditions in which they can thrive. It is a
Canadian vocation as well.
Since United Nations peace-keeping was invented in
1956 by Lester Pearson, we have been there; sweating it out
in the field, taking casualties, doing the tough work for
peace, in partnership with a growing number of other
Member States. Since 1956, Canada has fielded almost
100,000 men and women in United Nations operations in
every corner of the world. That contribution has been a
costly one for us, not least in lives lost. None the less, it is
a contribution which has been a symbol of pride to most
Canadians, a tangible expression of our national quest for a
better world.
Canadians speak from experience born of commitment.
We see the changes which must be made and the principles
which must remain immutable. The world is hungry for
multilateral solutions to conflict and war. This is our time,
the United Nations moment. We are living through decisive
political change. Cold war certainties have given way, but
in their place we have unpredictability and instability - a
political unease about our future, uncertainty about where
collective endeavours can take us. Most countries feel more
secure militarily, but our citizens, in their personal lives,
often feel less secure about their well-being, for themselves
and for generations to come.
But this broader perspective must not obscure the very
real military dangers which remain: excessive accumulations
of conventional arms; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction - chemical, biological and nuclear; and conflict
and human misery created by the breakdown of civil and
political society within States and across fragile and often
new borders.
The world has learned some hard lessons in recent
years. First, we have learned that our security is
interdependent. Within each specific area of concern -
whether military, economic, environment or health - no
nation can stand alone. We are all affected, positively and
negatively, by developments beyond our borders. And our
own actions, within our own countries, inevitably resonate
throughout the wider community of nations.
6 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
Secondly, we have learned that our security is
indivisible. We cannot escape the connections linking
issues; between, for example, economic growth,
environmental safety and population flows. Deterioration in
any one area can destabilize the whole. We must think
about security more broadly, in terms which address
fundamental sources of insecurity: questions of economic
development and prosperity; environmental integrity;
freedom from crime and physical threat; health; membership
in communities which reflect our values, traditions and
aspirations.
Thirdly, we have learned that genuine security is not
about control and repression. It is about striking the right
balance of interests, within countries and across borders.
Fourthly, we have learned that we have to find more
cooperative ways of addressing security issues, ways which
maximize the relative strengths of many existing institutions.
We foresee a network of collaborative arrangements - local,
regional and global - forming the building-blocks of a new
system of collective security, all hinged on the focal point of
the United Nations.
The Charter of the United Nations itself provides useful
guidance, describing possible relationships between the
United Nations and regional bodies in the pacific settlement
of local disputes. Cooperation between the United Nations,
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European
Community in Europe; between the United Nations, the
Commonwealth and the Organization of African Unity in
Africa; and between the United Nations and the Organization
of American States in Central America and Haiti has moved
us considerably along the path anticipated by the drafters of
the Charter. Moreover, regional organizations are often the
best equipped to deal with local sources of instability and
potential conflict, such as water disputes, demographic shifts
or human rights concerns.
For decades, the cold war hemmed us in. That time is
over. We have it within our grasp to fulfil the promise of
our Charter, to build a global cooperative security system
centred on the United Nations. For it is the United Nations
alone which can provide a universal forum for elaborating
new principles and negotiating new rules and standards.
And it is the United Nations alone which, as a universal
body, can bring the full weight of the international
community to bear on specific critical issues.
In the last five years alone, the involvement of the
United Nations in various multilateral military efforts has
grown exponentially. Five years ago there were seven such
operations; today there are 16. Five years ago there were
9,000 military personnel deployed with the United Nations;
today there are nearly 80,000, more than Canada has in all
of its regular armed forces. And as we look around the
world today, the prospect of even more operations has to be
seen as inevitable.
The transformation in United Nations operations has not
been simply quantitative of late. The fact is that the United
Nations is now engaged in a range of activities which goes
well beyond the traditional concepts of peace-keeping we
have been accustomed to in the past. Much of the
Secretary-General’s ground-breaking 'An Agenda for Peace'
has moved from prescription to reality, and rightly so. It is
quite right to ask whether and under what conditions the
United Nations should commit its resources to the resolution
of international crises. It is equally right to ask whether the
United Nations has the right tools to do what is asked of it.
(spoke in French)
The rapid expansion of United Nations operations in the
past several years has been both unprecedented and
instructive. In the process we have all learned certain
lessons, some in a very wrenching fashion. We would all do
well to take stock of our recent experience and determine
how we can together improve our capacity to act more
effectively.
Having been an active participant in virtually every
United Nations military operation, Canada has made its own
diagnosis and come to its own conclusions as to some
remedies that should be pursued.
(spoke in English)
To begin with, we must improve our collective capacity
to judge, to determine accurately and dispassionately the
nature of impending threats and the facts of specific cases.
We must also improve our capacity to act, to respond firmly
and effectively to events before they deteriorate into crises.
There are steps we can take now to improve our
collective capacity in the field of preventive diplomacy.
Recent initiatives to strengthen our early-warning system
should be implemented. To do that, the Secretary-General
should be given the resources necessary for independent
political analysis, analysis that he could draw on before
armed conflict is unleashed and when non-military
intervention can still be effective. Not only must warnings
be timely; they must also have an impact on decisions. The
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 7
Secretary-General must make full use of the provisions of
Article 99 of the Charter to bring to the attention of the
Security Council situations which may threaten peace. This
would itself provide a powerful stimulus to global attention
and necessary preventive action.
The United Nations ability to conduct preventive
diplomacy through the good offices of the Secretary-General
must be strengthened. The Secretary-General’s efforts to
address dozens of conflicts and potential conflicts require
tangible support. The preventive deployment of peace-
keepers to forestall conflict, as we have recently done in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, can prove very
useful and in the long run avoid a much larger commitment
of scarce resources.
Experience with the assignment of United Nations
military forces around the world has, in our view,
demonstrated a number of shortcomings. It is incumbent on
us all to move quickly to respond to them by changing the
way that business is conducted. First, major operations can
no longer be run on an ad hoc basis. The management,
planning and operational capacity of the United Nations has
to be reinforced. A permanent strategic headquarters staff
capable of controlling two or more large-scale,
multidimensional operations has to be put in place. To be
effective, this headquarters would need a comprehensive
information processing and planning capacity.
Secondly, the United Nations ability to bring matériel
and personnel speedily to a theatre of operations and to
ensure coordination between sources of equipment and
personnel has to be strengthened. Too often in the past, the
Secretary-General has had to delay United
Nations-sanctioned operations for want of adequate personnel
or matériel.
The ability to deploy United Nations troops rapidly to
emerging flashpoints has to be upgraded substantially. At a
minimum, Member States should enter into formal
commitments with the Secretary-General to provide troops
on a stand-by basis and tied to readiness standards, as
Canada has done in the past year.
Thirdly, United Nations Members have to build and
develop the large cadre of peace-keepers necessary for the
United Nations missions of the future. Peace-keeping
demands cultural sensitivity, the ability to mediate and a host
of other skills. Training will be required, particularly of a
corps of senior officers who will have to exercise leadership
in complex, difficult and dangerous situations. Training
holds the key to successfully integrating different national
contingents into one operation.
Fourthly, we need to ensure that field operations meet
high performance standards. Work on the development of
a common code of conduct and operating procedures for all
personnel serving under the United Nations flag should be
brought to an early conclusion.
Fifthly, we must also come to grips with the
increasingly serious dangers facing our peace-keepers. We
and others are working to clarify and codify principles and
measures for the protection of United Nations personnel,
particularly those involved in peace-keeping operations.
Canada will be proposing specific provisions for such a
convention to be discussed during the coming General
Assembly session.
In the last several years, a range of innovative proposals
has been put forward with a view to enhancing the capacity
of the United Nations to mount effective multilateral military
operations. Many of these suggestions have been the subject
of extensive debate in Canada, as they have in many other
countries. We have, in fact, been proponents of some of
these suggestions. We fully recognize, of course, that ours
is but one perspective. Actually realizing these necessitates
a much broader level of support by United Nations Member
States.
Accordingly, in the best interests of future United
Nations efforts, it is time that a panel of civilian and military
experts with experience in United Nations operations be
charged with assessing these and other proposals which
could further enhance the operational capacity of the United
Nations. Such a report should be finalized and submitted to
the Secretary-General next summer. It should include clear
recommendations on both the merits of the proposals and, as
importantly, how they could be implemented and financed.
The report would in turn would provide us with the basis for
coming to collective decisions on whether or not to proceed
with any of these. Only in this way can we more
definitively determine not only the potential need but the
requisite support for these proposals.
The agenda for such a review would include: the
establishment of a permanent United Nations staff college
for the training of military officers; the creation of more
training facilities for United Nations troops; the development
of a network of United Nations material supply depots
stockpiled with equipment for rapid dispatch to new United
Nations operations; the question whether United Nations
Member States would provide at nominal, if any, cost
8 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
equipment and matériel which would be made available to
United Nations contingents not having such resources in
their own military establishments; and the creation of a
permanent rapid deployment force under United Nations
command, based possibly on a new United Nations volunteer
force.
There may well be other issues that should be on that
agenda. The key, however, is to have that assessment made.
My own Government is committed to reviewing these and
other related questions in the context of a reappraisal of our
own military capacity, including our participation in United
Nations operations.
Security is more than simply a matter of being able to
deploy adequate numbers of troops on a timely basis.
Modern United Nations missions are drawing on expertise
far beyond that of traditional military peace-keepers. There
is a demand for civilian police, for election workers, for
human rights monitors, for engineers, administrators and
other specialists to rebuild infrastructure. It is not enough to
stop hostilities; the United Nations is now expected to build
the peace as well.
We are moving from a tradition of interposing peace-
keepers between hostile forces to new forms of engagement.
Rebuilding societies to stand on their own will be a complex
and lengthy process. Diplomatic peacemaking, military and
civilian peace-keeping and peace-building pose new sorts of
challenges. It has become obvious, in our view, that a more
integrated and coordinated approach by the United Nations
is now mandatory if we are to cope successfully with many
of the crises which draw United Nations military forces. We
have had a measure of success in this regard in Cambodia,
but far less in other situations, such as Somalia. United
Nations military operations cannot in and of themselves
address or resolve the root causes of conflict. That is
something that can be achieved only through a much more
broadly based effort, be it political, economic or social. In
effect, we need a capacity to rebuild, over time, countries or
societies which have suffered structural collapse.
An effective system of cooperative security, led by a
reinvigorated United Nations, will cost money; but then,
genuine security always carries a price which is worth
paying. Resources are limited, and we must all share the
burden. This means paying United Nations bills in full and
on time. That is what Canada does, and we expect others to
do the same. It is difficult to overstate the damage that
non-payment and the build-up of arrears does to the United
Nations system, and to our collective capacity for effective
action.
Burden-sharing means taking part in the activities of the
United Nations, from contributing troops for peace-keeping
missions to providing observers for election monitoring.
Today, Canada is providing just under 4 per cent of all
United Nations forces. Little less than one year ago,
Canadian troops accounted for 10 per cent of all United
Nations forces. Those are rather remarkable figures when
we consider that Canada accounts for less than one half of
1 per cent of the world’s population, and that our military
establishment represents less than 1 per cent of global
military expenditures. This is not to suggest that we are
seeking a diminished role, one more commensurate with our
relative status in the world. It is, instead, to question
whether others are doing their fair share.
Burden-sharing also means sharing political
responsibility for shaping and taking decisions, and for
ensuring that decisions and commitments are fulfilled. That
is why we welcome the Security Council’s increasing
attention to drafting clear mandates, sharply defining
objectives and setting deadlines. Clear and realistic
mandates are necessary if the United Nations is to remain
both credible and effective.
In Canada as in a number of other countries,
governments are facing difficult fiscal circumstances and
publics that are demanding more effective, efficient and
economical service from government. The need for
rationalization of government, for streamlining, and for an
end to overlap, duplication and waste is one that my own
Government has addressed in the last several months. Our
efforts in that respect will continue. We have a
responsibility to our own taxpayers to ensure that the same
standards and objectives are applied to the international
institutions of which we are members.
Institutions of the United Nations cannot remain
immune to the challenges, financial as well as political, of
the late twentieth century. They too must help shoulder the
burden by becoming leaner, more efficient, better focused,
more responsible and more responsive. They must adapt,
just as Member States are doing, to new technologies, to
continuing fiscal restraint, to the challenge to do better with
less. The structures here are not sacrosanct. No position,
expenditure or institution should be free of the scrutiny
under which we in Canada, and others elsewhere, have
placed our own State structures.
We applaud the reforms initiated by the Secretary-
General and we pledge our support for further action. We
urge him to press on, and we urge all Member States to
Forty-eighth session - 29 September l993 9
support his efforts. Our security, the security of generations
to come, is in the balance.
We have a great deal to do. All of our efforts to
reform the peacemaking and peace-keeping function of the
United Nations will be in vain if we are not able to come to
terms collectively with what must be regarded as the most
dangerous current threat to international security: the
ubiquitous spread of weapons of mass destruction. In too
many areas of the world, the prospect of conflict involving
nuclear weapons risks destabilizing already tense situations,
and could lead to human disasters of unimaginable
proportions. We must muster the collective resolve to put
teeth into the Non-Proliferation Treaty, disciplining harshly
those who violate its provisions and giving confidence to
those who abide by its undertakings. We wholeheartedly
welcome the priority attached to this issue by President
Clinton, and the practical measures he proposed.
Our own priorities are clear: further progress in nuclear
arms reduction; indefinite extension and universal adherence
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty; negotiation of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty; early progress to bring the
chemical weapons Convention into force; and strengthening
of the United Nations Conventional Arms Register. These
direct investments in peace and security must be
accompanied by collective action on the root causes of
insecurity.
We must develop and consolidate democratic
institutions and the rule of law. Modern history teaches us
that democracies are the least likely States to wage war, the
best guarantors of peace. The impartial rule of law
domestically is the surest way of keeping democracies
democratic; internationally, it is the best way to resolve
disputes before they become crises.
We must protect and promote human rights. Security
begins at the level of the individual, and there can be neither
peace nor security while people, singly or collectively,
minorities or majorities, are unable to uphold their dignity
and exercise their inherent rights. The General Assembly
must build on the progress achieved at the Vienna
Conference earlier this year and agree to establish by the end
of this year the post of United Nations high commissioner
for Human Rights.
We must attack the poverty, deprivation and economic
underdevelopment which so often lie at the heart of
instability and insecurity. The Secretary-General should
draw up an agenda for development. It should incorporate
a bold rethinking of how the United Nations can best play its
important role in the economic and social spheres, while
avoiding the duplication of activities best carried forward
elsewhere. The Agenda could help redefine the role of the
United Nations in promoting sustainable development in
close cooperation with other international economic and
financial institutions. We owe no less to the children of the
world as we celebrate the third anniversary of the Summit
for Children.
(spoke in French)
To be lasting, economic growth has to respect the
environment. Hence, we have to follow through on our
collective commitments at last year’s Rio Summit to protect
the environment. The social and economic costs of not
doing so are simply unacceptable, a fact that is all too real
for the thousands of Canadians dependent on the Atlantic
fishery.
(spoke in English)
The brutal collapse of the fishery in the North-West Atlantic
and elsewhere is compelling evidence of the need to address
that crisis urgently. The United Nations must urgently adopt
a legally binding international regime to conserve and
manage high-seas fish stocks.
It is clear, however, that no amount of development
assistance can match the economic growth that could be
achieved through a freer flow of goods, services, capital and
ideas among our Member States. Indeed, the single most
important step we can take collectively towards improving
the prosperity of developing and developed economies alike
would be to reach, without any further delay, a substantial
outcome to the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations. These discussions have reached a pivotal
stage; we must not lose this precious opportunity. My
Government remains committed to doing its part to reach
that goal and to pursuing other opportunities for trade
liberalization, such as through the North American Free
Trade Agreement. We are convinced that the Agreement
will make the North American economies both more
competitive and more open and will provide a much needed
stimulus to global trade and investment.
Our peace and security are not there for the taking. We
must work for them, and work hard - in our own countries,
in our regions, and globally. We must renew and revitalize
existing structures and, where necessary, build anew. We
have a historic opportunity to make good on the language of
the United Nations Charter, on the thwarted promise of those
early days, to build in our own time a cooperative system of
10 General Assembly - Forty-eighth session
peace and security which respects difference but holds fast
to universal principles of human dignity and freedom. Let
us move forward, together, now.
﻿1.	 Mr. President, I wish to offer you my congratulations on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. It gives my own Government particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a representative of Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our co-operation and we will depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discussions which we are beginning.
2.	I should like also to express again the high esteem in which we hold Secretary-General Waldheim. We continue to benefit greatly from our close consultations with him and we place great trust in his leadership of this Organization.
3.	Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the atomic age, this Organization came into being. Its first and most urgent purpose has been to tenure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world.
4.	Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should happen the world we leave our children will mock our own hopes for peace.
5.	The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional weapons, The temptation to use those weapons, or fear that someone else might do it first, would be almost irresistible. The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts international commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war.
6.	Violence, terrorism, assassination and undeclared wars all threaten to destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the dominant characteristic of our age. Unless we establish a code of international behaviour in which the resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of national interests we will crush the world's dreams for human development and the full flowering of human freedom.
7.	We have already become a global community, but only in the sense that we face common problems and share, for good or evil, a common future. In this community, the power to solve the world's problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies solely in the hands of a few nations. Power is now widely shared among many nations with different cultures, different histories and different aspirations. The question is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will work together to realize our common hopes for peace.
8.	Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all armaments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade and settling disputes by peaceful means.
9.	When atomic weapons were used for the first time Winston Churchill described the power of the atom as  a revelation long mercifully withheld from man . Since then we have learned, in Durrenmatt’s chilling words, that  what has once been thought can never be unthought .
10.	If we are to have any assurance that our children will live out their lives in a world which satisfies our hope—or that they will have a chance to live at all-we must finally come to terms with this enormous nuclear force and turn it to exclusively beneficial ends. Peace will not be assured until the weapons of war are finally put away. While we work towards that goal nations will want sufficient arms to preserve their security. The United States purpose is to ensure peace. It is for that reason that our military posture and our alliances will remain as strong as necessary to deter attack.
11.	However, the security of the global community cannot for ever rest on a balance of terror. In the past, war has been accepted as the ultimate arbiter of disputes among nations, but in the nuclear era we can no longer think of war as merely a continuation of diplomacy by other means. Nuclear war cannot be  measured by the archaic standards of  victory  or  defeat . This stark reality imposes on the 

United States and the Soviet Union an awesome and special responsibility.
12.	The United States is engaged along with other nations in a broad range of negotiations. In Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], we and the Soviets are within sight of a significant agreement in limiting the total numbers of weapons and in restricting certain categories of weapons of special concern to each of us. We can also start the crucial process of curbing the relentless march of technological development which makes nuclear weapons ever more difficult to control.
13.	We must look beyond the present, and work to prevent the critical threats and instabilities of the future. If the principles of self-restraint, reciprocity and mutual accommodation of interests are observed, then the United States and the Soviet Union not only will succeed in limiting weapons but also will create r foundation for better relations in other spheres of interest.
14.	The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with our security interests, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per cent, 20 percent or even 50 per cent, Then we will work for further reductions with a view to a world truly free of nuclear weapons.
15.	The United States also recognize the threat of continued testing of nuclear explosives.
16.	Negotiations for a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital nation J security interests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all the parties as serving a longer-term interest that justifies the restraints of the moment. The longer-term interest in this instance is to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world that the major nuclear Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
17.	My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—peaceful or military-and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.
18.	During the past nine months, I have expressed the special importance we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation; but I fear that many do not understand why the United States feels as it does. Why is it so important to avoid the chance that one or two or 10 other nations might acquire one or two or 10 nuclear weapons of their own? Let me try to explain, for I deeply believe that this is one of the greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
19.	It is a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended enemy; they threaten every nation—combatant and non-combatant alike. That is why all of us must be concerned.
20.	Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United States and the Soviet Union, and in the United Kingdom, France and China, is something we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that other nations need to develop their own weapons, any more than it provides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others. Rather it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which have the capacity to export nuclear fuels and nuclear technologies-the obligation to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, the obligation to ensure that nothing we export contributes, directly or indirectly, to the production of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations arc seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the Soviet Unions even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT talks, have already moved closer towards agreement and co-operation in our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
22. I believe that the London suppliers group must conclude its work as it is presently constituted, so that world security will be safeguarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have learned that it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some materials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguard ire necessary.
23 . Two weeks from now, in our own country, more than SO supplier and consuming nations will convene in Washington for the Conference on International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation which we proposed last spring. For the next several years experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle. The scientists and the policy-makers of these nations will face a tremendous challenge.  We know that, by the year 2000, nuclear power reactors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thousands of bombs every year. I believe, from my own personal knowledge of this issue, that there are ways to solve the problems we face. I believe that there are alternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on global basis. I hope, therefore, that the Conference on the international Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have the support and encouragement of every nation.
24.	I have heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are facile  that thing is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not expand its membership., By genuine co-operation we can make certain that this terrible club expands no further.
25.	I have talked about the special problems of nuclear arms control' and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future-even the near future-but one for the immediate present. World-wide military expenditures are. now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year. Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as much equipping each soldier as we spent educating each child. The industrialized nations spend the most money, but the rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world. While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is increasing rapidly.
26.	The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an already troubled world economy.
27.	.For its part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of the weapons we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbours are purchasing large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier nations that practise restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
28.	We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and sophisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are committed to stop the spiral of the increasing sale of weapons.
29.	Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate self-defence, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly and ever more expensive weapons.
30.	Fourteen years ago, one of my predecessors spoke in this hall under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these. It was a time, he said, of comparative calm and there was art atmosphere of rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy. The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms race-a test-ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.
31.	But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect John F. Kennedy placed before this Assembly because, as a community of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict among us.
32.	As we seek to establish the principles of detente among the major nuclear Powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in regional conflicts. The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
33.	The United States supports the United Kingdom's efforts to bring about a peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zimbabwe. We joined .other members of the Security Council last week and also the Secretary-General in efforts to bring about independence and democratic rule in Namibia. We are pleased with the level of co-operation we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the area, as well as with those peoples who are struggling for independence. We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed solution to the problems in Zimbabwe, and to co-operate still more closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia.
34.	But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their actions in Zimbabwe and Namibia, so that we can bring about that majority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern half of the African continent.
35.	Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the developed and the developing nations alike. So true peace-peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world.
36.	The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for peace in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), but negotiations in good faith by all parties is needed to give substance to peace.
37.	Such negotiations in good faith must be inspired by a recognition that all nations in the area-Israel and the Arab countries-have a right to exist in peace, with the early establishment of economic and cultural exchanges and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a process in which the bitter divisions o: generations, even centuries- hatreds and suspicions—can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be successful if any of the parties harbours the deceitful view that peace is simply an interlude in which to prepare for war.
38.	Negotiations in good faith will also require acceptance by all sides of the fundamental rights and interest of everyone involved.
39.	For Israel, this means borders that are recognized and secure. Security arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to Israel's security is unquestionable.
40.	For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Israel is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all the peoples of the area. How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course; for the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations, and not for us to dictate.
41.	We do not intend to impose from the outside a settlement on the nations of the Middle East.
42.	The United States has been meeting with the Foreign Ministers of Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace. We are staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with which we share responsibility for reconvening the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva Conference before the end of this year. While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be answered.
310
43.	The major Powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint in areas of the world where they have competing interests because the association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead to serious confrontation. In the Indian Ocean area neither we nor the Soviet Union has a large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition between us. Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabilize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition. Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian Ocean area might be even further-reduced.
44.	The peaceful settlement of differences is, of course, essential. The United States is willing to abide by that principle, as in the case of the recently signed Panama Canal treaties. Once ratified, these treaties can transform the United States-Panama relationship into one that permanently protects the interests and respects the sovereignty of both our countries.
45.	We have all survived and surmounted major challenges since the United Nations was founded, but we can accelerate progress even in a world of ever-increasing diversity. A commitment to strengthen international institutions is vital, but progress lies also in our own national policies. We can work together to form a community of peace if we accept the kind of obligations that I have suggested today.
46.	To summarize: first, there is an obligation to remove the threat of nuclear weaponry, to reverse the build-up of armaments and the trade in them, and to conclude bilateral and multilateral arms control agreements that can bring security to all of us.
47.	In order to reduce the reliance of nations on nuclear weaponry, 1 hereby solemnly declare, on behalf of the United States, that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defence; that is, in circumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our territories or armed forces, or such an attack on our allies.
48.	In addition, we hope that initiatives by the Western nations to secure mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe will be met by equal response from the Warsaw Pact countries.
49.	Secondly, an obligation to show restraint in areas of tension, to negotiate disputes and settle them peacefully, and to strengthen the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations.
50.	And, finally, an effort by all nations, East as well as West, North as well as South, to fulfil mankind's aspirations for human development and human freedom. It is to meet these basic demands that we build Governments and seek peace.
51.	We must share these obligations for our own mutual survival and our own mutual prosperity.
52.	We can see a world at peace. We can work for a world without want. We can build a global community dedicated to these purposes and to human dignity.
53.	The view that I have sketched for you today is that of only one leader in only one nation. However wealthy and powerful the United States may be, however capable of leadership, this power is increasingly only relative. The leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper.
 

	

﻿42.	 Mr. President, I am pleased to be one of the first speakers to congratulate you on your election, which my delegation regards as a tribute both to your personal qualities and to the important role your country has played in the United Nations. In agreeing to preside not only over our annual deliberations this autumn, but also over next year's important special session on disarmament, you have accepted a heavy responsibility. I know you will fulfil it with distinction.
43.	This year we welcome two new Members to the Assembly, the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. As a member of the Security Council, Canada was pleased to recommend both countries for membership, and we look forward to working with them in this Organization.
44.	Like others who will participate in this debate, I have received much advice on what I should say that might be helpful in solving the many problems we face. It has been a frustrating experience.
45.	I have concluded regrettably that I could read my last year's speech again, word for word, and no one would notice the repetition, nor would they care! The sad truth is that every serious issue I and many others raised last year remain unresolved and some now pose a greater threat to peace and security than they did 12 months ago. It has not been a good year for the United Nations.
46.	Small wonder that our deliberations have so little relevance for our publics back home or for the many millions around the world whom we are committed to help but who have become disillusioned and cynical about our ability to fill answers to what are in many cases, matters of life and death.
47.	I make these judgments with regret. No country has been more consistent than Canada in supporting the principles of the United Nations. We do not have to apologize for our record here or for the attitude of the Canadian people in accepting responsibilities for peacekeeping, for leadership in the North-South dialogue and for making a fair contribution to all United Nations initiatives. Canada and Canadians have earned the right to be heard and what Canadians are saying is that the performance of the United Nations is not good enough.
48.	Canada does not, of course, exclude itself from all blame for this inadequate record. Like other countries, there are times when we get our priorities mixed and lack the proper sense of urgency in dealing with new or continuing threats to world order and security. Nor am I interested merely in pointing the finger at others for the dubious pleasure of giving vent to my own frustrations. I speak as I do because I know that many of you share my views. It is not our sense of commitment that is flagging; no one in his right mind would wilfully project the world towards more bloodshed and potential global conflict. All of us want peace and order in international affairs.
49.	Yet we are trapped in the tangled thickets of history, of fear, suspicion, and ancient deep-seated antagonisms. Self-interest usually prevails over our efforts to define and foster larger, more generous objectives. I am aware of the conviction of many in this Organization and elsewhere that this is the reality of international affairs- the real world  as they call it—that glaring imperfections are a normal and unavoidable part of the human condition and that we must resign ourselves to the mere containment of the most virulent and dangerous manifestations of human greed and irrationality, accepting that the world's fate is to stumble on from one crisis to the next. There are grounds for healthy scepticism, I agree; but in the United Nations that scepticism gives way too often to resignation and to a form of professional cynicism that views all new approaches as yet another example of short-lived idealistic naiveté.
50.	Let me assure you that I am not naive; but I cannot accept, Canada cannot accept, that this Organization and its Member States are powerless to remove the root-causes of those major tensions that now require all of us to live out our lives in the constant shadow of impending disaster.
51.	There is among us another widely held view that, while any country can light a fire, only the super-Powers have the option of either fuelling its flames or putting it out. There is, of course, a key role for the large, wealthy and powerful nations and their actions should not be greeted by automatic mistrust. But for smaller countries to do nothing or adhere blindly and unquestioningly to this or that power bloc is to avoid responsibility and to make a mockery of the United Nations and the opportunity it provides for reasoned, free and open debate.
52.	However awesome the outcome of super-Power decision-making and action can be, we must never forget that many of today's flash-points are not of their making. Many smaller countries have shown that they are perfectly capable entirely on their own of causing problems for all of us. And such actions are all the more reprehensible when they risk or even invite the escalation of East-West tensions.
53.	If we are to make progress here, there must be an end to the sterile debates of recent years where the outcome is always a foregone conclusion. If the vitality of open debate is not restored to the United Nations then increasingly the important decisions affecting the fate of mankind will be made elsewhere and this Organization and most of its agencies will wither into insignificance and, eventually, unlamented oblivion.
54.	Lest any consider this too harsh a judgment and too pessimistic a forecast, I ask you to recall objectively the reaction of many of our own publics to United Nations deliberations and resolutions. My own experience at home and around the world has been bad.
55.	Granted these criticisms are often based on prejudice or ignorance. But we know too that much can and should be done to make the United Nations more effective. I propose to give certain examples as well as suggestions for improvement.
56.	Two of the main issues that will come before us at this session are the Middle East and southern African situations. Last year we adopted 20 resolutions on the Middle East and no less than 34 on questions related to southern Africa. To what purpose was all that time and effort, not to mention money, expended? The answer is surely  very little  because many of those resolutions simply expressed moral judgments and were devoid of practical proposals for action. Furthermore, everyone knew that they had little if any prospect of being implemented. Yet the vast and increasingly expensive machinery of the United Nations ground on not only through the 50-odd resolutions I have mentioned but through nearly 200 more, many in the same category and thus predestined to suffer the same fate. Already gathering dust, I suspect, is the 400-page compendium of those resolutions, most echoing word for word the deliberations of previous years.
57.	No one should be surprised therefore at the indifference with which the media and the public greet their publication. By adopting more resolutions we have succeeded paradoxically in ensuring that they receive less, not more, attention. Changing our collective habits will not be easy. By passing more resolutions we are certainly letting our situation deteriorate. We should scrutinize the agenda closely to resist the automatic re-inclusion of old items and the addition of less essential new ones. We should group items so that similar debates will not take place in different committees on closely related subjects. We should avoid the proliferation of resolutions which express the Members' aspirations or objectives but do not contribute in a practical way to achieving any of them. A few short, precise and practical resolutions will have more impact than the many rambling and ineffective ones we now consider each year.
58.	As a member once each decade of the Security Council, Canada has accumulated some experience but also has a chance to take a fresh look at its activities every time we return. So far this year, the Council has debated several significant issues in a sensible, restrained fashion. None of us would claim, however, that it has done much to enhance its position as the United Nations organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Our Secretary-General has wisely warned us of the risk that there may come, in his words,  a time when the Council is desperately needed and will be found to be too weak to fulfil its responsibilities.
59.	The problems arise, not because of weaknesses in the Council's structure or powers but, rather, from a lack of impetus. To give a greater sense of purpose to the Council, the Charter provides for periodic meetings at which members be represented by a Cabinet member or other specially designated representative. Remarkably, Mr. President, as you well know, the Council held the first of such meetings in its history at the time of the twenty-fifth anniversary celebrations. This Assembly welcomed the Council's intention to hold further periodic meetings, but none has taken place.
60.	I propose that the Security Council should begin meeting regularly at ministerial level. Fifteen ministers meeting together could give a new sense of life and political purpose to the Council. Instead of following a formal agenda, they could have a free discussion of major issues of international peace and security, based on, perhaps, a special report by the Secretary-General. The meetings should be held in an informal atmosphere, without a small army of advisers, thus allowing the ministers to exchange views informally. Meetings at ministerial level should be held once or twice a year rather than once every 25 years. The first meeting might well be devoted to finding ways to make the work of the Council more relevant to the major issues of peace and security.
61.	When I spoke here last year, I suggested that the Economic and Social Council should be given a more significant role. At its spring and summer sessions, the Council considers a bewildering variety of issues. It has even less success in what should be its central task-setting priorities and  coordinating the work of this family of organizations in the economic, social, cultural, educational, health and related fields. My delegation believes that the Council should have more frequent and shorter sessions. At each of these it could deal thoroughly with one group of subjects, covering all of its agenda over a two-year period. From time to time the Council should also meet at ministerial level to review major economic or social questions when policy considerations justify participation at this level. In all United Nations organs, I welcome new practices of informal consultation and negotiations through contact groups which help to turn the United Nations from a deliberative body into a real negotiating forum.
62.	We must also work for an improvement in the work of the specialized agencies. Many of them have a distinguished record. But our method for controlling the system as a whole has been unsatisfactory. We have been good at devising new programmes, but less so at identifying ones which are obsolete or at preventing duplication. One result has been an escalation of costs. A few years ago one of my predecessors complained to the Assembly that the assessed budgets of the United Nations family of organizations had doubled in 10 years. Now they have more than doubled in five. We shall have to ensure that budgets are kept down, and that money is spent only on subjects that have the highest priority.
63.	A second problem with the specialized agencies has been the extent to which they have-been turned from their main purposes to deal with the political issues which are the responsibility of this Assembly. Canada is determined to resist this process. We have been particularly concerned about the ILO. We value that organization for its record of achievement on human rights and its unique contribution to the United Nations system as a whole. We are anxious to preserve the impartiality and authority of its procedures so that a member State will not be condemned without impartial investigation. I believe that many members share our views and will work together for this purpose.
64.	These proposals deal principally with improvements in our procedures. If implemented, and I confess quite frankly that I am by no means sanguine that they will be, they would put us in a better position to deal with the important issues; but the complexity of the issues themselves will no: be lessened.
65.	Although they manifest themselves in a variety of troubling ways, including open conflicts, it is now apparent that the principal concerns of most Members here are, in fact, economic. The United Nations and its agencies have their work cut out for them if we are to move closer to a more just and equitable world economic order. The barriers to success are enormous as unemployment and inflation continue to plague even the wealthiest countries. Unless a spirit of reasonableness prevails, unless demands and responses are tailored to present economic realities, I must caution that even in Canada, which is far from being the least generous of the developed countries, pressures will develop to focus on our own considerable problems even to the exclusion of the international consequences. I need hardly tell the Assembly that we are not alone in this difficulty.
66.	Canada's goal is to build on the foundations it helped to create through its co-chairmanship of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation. Given the proper climate we will work hard to devise a strategy that is both broadly acceptable and realistic. In the coming weeks, Canada's representatives here and at other United Nations and related meetings will announce additional Canadian financial commitments to a large number of international organizations. I shall not take time today to relate the details. I do wish, however, to say a word about food aid.
67.	The world food shortage has been eased by good harvests in many countries. However, the factors which gave rise to the recent crisis are still present, and, as many representatives know, recent studies concur in the likelihood of a shortfall in the next five to ten years. One proposal to improve world food security concerns the idea of a 500,000-ton emergency grain reserve. Canada previously announced a willingness to contribute, along with other donors. I am now able to announce that, subject to Parliamentary approval, we would be willing to provide the equivalent of $7.5 million in food grain-roughly 50,000 tons or 10 per cent of the total objective.
68.	At this session we must establish the machinery for developing a new international development strategy for the third development decade. This task provides us with a rare opportunity to demonstrate the continuing relevance of the United Nations. We can take advantage of it, or we can allow our  deliberations to deteriorate into sterile rhetorical exchanges which will sap the goodwill of those who must give and deepen the bitterness of the receivers. Let us resolve now to choose the first course.
69.	Since I last spoke to this Assembly there have been important developments with respect to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. This historic Conference illustrates very well some of the best and some of the worst aspects of United Nations deliberations and processes. Without the United Nations there is little doubt that management and control of the oceans and their resources would have deteriorated into anarchy. The Conference is, therefore, one of the United Nations great achievements; its originators and all who have participated deserve great credit. But it is an agonizingly slow process.
70.	In the past 12 months many countries, including Canada, have extended their fishing jurisdiction over living resources in their coastal waters out to 200 miles. While it is true that these actions are based upon the common will of States reflected in the draft conference texts, it is also true that before that point could be reached many fish stocks had become dangerously depleted, vital elements of the world's fishing industry were jeopardized and serious confrontations developed between traditionally friendly countries.
71.	There are legitimate and complex reasons why the negotiations were difficult. But we cannot ignore the fact either that old habits and patterns are hard to abandon, and it is ironic in some respects that only by acting in advance of the conclusion of the Conference did Canada and countries that took similar action enhance the United Nations and the undoubted value of the Conference. This lesson should, and I hope will, lend new urgency to the important work of the Conference that remains to be completed. We have taken 10 years to come this far, and the gains will be dissipated by a series of unilateral actions unless a comprehensive agreed international regime comes into force very soon.
72.	It should be self-evident, but sometimes, strangely, it is not, that all of our painfully slow progress towards a more just and well ordered society rests on the fragile assumption that we can create and preserve a peaceful world. No argument should be necessary in defence of that proposition. Yet we continue to witness new outbreaks of violence and to hear from leaders genuinely convinced that the only path to their objectives leads across the battlefield. That belief is prevalent at present in parts of southern Africa.
73.	Soon we shall be discussing the most recent plan for the attainment of majority rule in Rhodesia. Canada fully supports the plan not only because we believe that it provides the basis for a fair and equitable solution but also because we reject totally the alternative of further bloodshed. There must be no lessening of our resolve to see the end of the present illegal minority Rhodesian regime, and for that reason we must redouble our efforts and our commitment to peaceful means. Otherwise, whatever the eventual outcome, it will have about it the smell of failure and the sad realization that good can be achieved only through death and destruction.
74.	In the Middle East the issues are even more complex and the dangers to world security proportionately greater. All of us are hoping that present initiatives and negotiations will prove successful and today, as in the past, Canada urges all concerned to recognize fully their awesome responsibility to make every effort and explore every avenue that can lead to a peaceful and permanent solution to longstanding differences.
75.	Canada remains committed to the framework for peace embodied in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Our support for Israel's right to exist as defined by those resolutions is firm and unequivocal. We deplore, and we shall continue to do so, all efforts within this Assembly and elsewhere to attribute patently false motives to Israel or to diminish its status and rights within the United Nations or as a legitimate member of the world community.
76.	Canada believes that all countries in the region need and have a right to expect more than just another cease-fire or merely a formal end to belligerency. If this kind of peace is to be achieved, the crucial issues of territory must be solved. The only truly secure borders-those which are freely recognized by the parties on either side of them-must be determined by negotiations within the framework of resolution 242 (1967). Until then, we believe that nothing should be done unilaterally or illegally to change or predetermine the status of any part of the occupied territories. We regret that such actions are still being taken without regard to their effect on the prospects for peace. It is also clear that any resolution of territorial issues, if it is indeed to bring-about the lasting peace that all desire, must provide a just, humanitarian and political solution for the Palestinian Arab people by which they can live in peace without threatening the security of any country in the region. Any solution for the Palestinian Arabs must of course include their clear and unequivocal acceptance of Israel's permanent existence as their neighbour. During this Assembly, we should bring our weight to bear to bring about .In early resumption of negotiations and not attempt to substitute empty debates or one-sided resolutions for the complicated, slow, but essential process of working out a settlement by the parties themselves.
77.	Obviously, the Middle East situation has reached a crucial stage. For all concerned, these are days of opportunity. We must pray that they act wisely and with a full awareness of the awful consequences of unwise actions.
78.	For, whenever there is a potential for conflict these days, we must not only contemplate localized, limited hostilities, frightful as those always are. We know that each new flare-up wherever it occurs in the world is a potential threat to us all and even to world survival. We must remind those who would risk the use of arms that they are endangering more than the lives of their own people. Every weapon fired in anger is aimed, potentially, at the heart of civilization. Thus we have a right and a duty to speak out; for what is at stake's in truth the peace of Canada and of every other country in the world today.
79.	Because this is the simple truth, no problem is of greater concern to this Assembly than disarmament, but, equally, no subject has more frustrated our efforts and disappointed our peoples. Next year's special session can provide us with an opportunity to move towards real disarmament. Canada was a sponsor of the resolution calling for the session, and we shall put forward specific proposals to make it a success.
80.	But we cannot wait for the special session. The need is immediate to improve and strengthen the international non-proliferation system, implement the non-proliferation Treaty more effectively and re-examine the risks and benefits in various nuclear cycles and processes.
81.	If anything is more frightening than the prospect of rapidly escalating local hostilities, it is the nightmare of unrestrained nuclear proliferation with all its attendant horrors. I find it difficult to understand how anyone among the world's leaders could consider that an expansion in the number of nuclear-weapon States would contribute to greater world stability. Canada, despite its known competence in the field, rejected the nuclear-weapons option long ago. Now we are making every effort to ensure that others do likewise. We shall co-operate, in terms of nuclear supplies and technology, only with those countries which have signed the non-proliferation Treaty or are otherwise committed to safeguards of full scope. We are encouraged by the fact that some other nuclear suppliers, including Australia and Sweden, have adopted a similar policy. We hope that there will be more.
82.	For Canada recognizes that, with the inevitable decline and increasing costs of conventional energy sources, much of the world will have no choice but to turn to nuclear sources to meet energy demands. We appreciate also that there are legitimate differences of opinion on the question of the safest and most efficient means of utilizing nuclear resources and technology. This is true even in countries whose commitment to non-proliferation is total and unquestioned.
83.	Canada therefore welcomes and supports the proposal made at the London summit meeting for a thorough study of alternative fuel cycles that avoid the use of plutonium or improve safeguards. We commend the United States for its initiatives in this field and hope that all countries will give it their full support. This subject is much too broad and too important to be dealt with in a few moments. I hope that this Assembly will provide the time for a full-scale discussion, for there can be no subject of greater importance.
84.	Because of Canada's special interest, I hope and expect that there will be an opportunity also to discuss United
Nations peace-keeping activities. In the Middle East, Cyprus and South Asia, United Nations peace-keeping forces or observer groups are in place. Soon there may be further requests involving Zimbabwe and Namibia.
85.	Canada has consistently responded to United Nations requests to provide personnel as available for peace-keeping, because we believe this to be a significant way to contribute to world peace. But in Canada there is growing concern about peace keeping for two reasons. First, many of the disputes which led to the need for peace-keeping forces appear no nearer to solution than they were one, two and even three decades ago. We recognize that these basic and intractable problems may indeed take a lot of time and cannot be settled overnight. What we wish, but do not always see, is evidence that the parties are intent on negotiating an end to their disputes. Secondly, although the two most recent forces-UNEF and the UNDGF-are being property paid for through collective assessment, we have failed to reach general agreement on how future peacekeeping operations should be financed and UNFICYP is over $50 million in debt. If operations are not properly funded, many Members of the United Nations will not be able to afford to provide forces-a situation which will not be healthy either for this Organization or for the concept of peace-keeping.
86.	In considering future participation, Canada will weigh these two considerations: whether peace-keeping forces will contribute to a settlement rather than provide temporary relief or even contribute to a perpetuation of the problem, and whether arrangements to pay for them represent the common will of Members to assume the financial burden and permit troop contributors to be selected from a broad cross-section of countries.
87.	I have no doubt we will hear a great deal about human rights during the coming months, and not only here at the United Nations. Within a few days the review conference on the Final Act adopted by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe at Helsinki opens in Belgrade. Canada, as one of the signers of that document, will make its views known at that time.
88.	But we must also recognize that the United Nations has a major responsibility in the human rights field; one we have not always discharged fully or effectively.
89.	Last year we welcomed the coming into force of the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights. Paradoxically, however, at a time when these new human rights instruments have defined more fully the rights of persons in States which have ratified these instruments and have created new machinery to monitor the compliance of Member States with their legal and moral obligations the gap between the ideals of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the practice of States has widened noticeably. It is regrettable that only one third of the total membership of the United Nations has ratified the major human rights covenants, and that even fewer States have accepted the Optional Protocol. The various monitoring and reporting procedures are too slow and cumbersome to be truly effective, and offer little tangible assistance to victims of violations.
90.	More progress can and must be made in those areas where abuses are flagrant and persistent. We should direct our efforts towards finding a means of monitoring compliance with the Declaration against torture passed by the General Assembly in 1975. We should improve the procedures for screening complaints and for acting on those that reflect serious abuse. We should consider better procedures for co-ordination of all United Nations activity in defence of human rights.
91.	We recognize that the Charter of the United Nations obliges Member States to respect the sovereignty of others. But it is surely consistent with acceptance of the principle of non-interference to urge more complete and universal recognition of other freely assumed obligations-the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedom for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
92.	The fact is that on this as on all the other issues I have mentioned the performance of the United Nations and of all of its Member States is being examined more closely and critically than ever before, for the sound and obvious reason that the stakes are higher than ever before.
93.	I have spoken critically of some aspects of our past performance and present practices. I have done so not out of any desire to weaken this Organization but because Canada is convinced that without a marked change of attitude on the part of Members and without the reforms that are so clearly necessary, the erosion of the effectiveness and prestige of the United Nations will continue.
94.	We must dedicate ourselves to work for this Organization as if our lives depended on it. In truth they probably do.

 1.	May I begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption this year of the weighty office that you hold.
2.	Foremost in my thoughts, as I again have the great honor of addressing this Assembly, are the enormous hopes that the world's peoples have had of this Organization. These hopes have constantly had to confront the grave problems and dangers that continue to threaten world peace and security and to divide the nations of the world. But I am also conscious of the accomplishments of the United Nations in the past 40 years in advancing some of our common aspirations. There is progress towards greater equity in economic opportunity. We have avoided generalized world conflict. Appalling wars have occurred, but they have been contained. The United Nations role in these achievements is especially significant when we consider the limitations that we, as Member States, have placed on its capacity to act.
3.	I congratulate our SecretaryGeneral on his own tireless efforts over the years. I wish particularly to place in review today the notion of the United Nations place in world affairs because I am very conscious of the fact that it is almost 20 years exactly since one of the Secretary General's forerunners, the great Dag Hammarskjold, was killed, in the service of world peace and of our Organization.
4.	The sort of world problems that existed 20 years ago are a gauge for measuring how far we have come, if indeed we have come any distance at all, in our search for the truly better world that we were then after. A simple judgment is not easy. The world was dangerous then and it is dangerous now. But some of the dangers today are different than they were in 1961. It requires adaptation on the part of the States Members of the Organization to deal with them. We are entitled to ask whether it is not because of difficulties in adapting the Organization to change, as well as the restrictions that we have placed in it, that the United Nations impact on world problems has not been greater.
5. Not all of today's problems are different. Sadly, some of the problems then are still with us today white minority domination in South Africa, for example, and South Africa's continued occupation of Namibia, or the seemingly intractable problems of the Middle East. Others have appeared to work their way back into our preoccupations, such as features of EastWest competition that for a time had receded from the forefront of our attention.
6.	But, whatever the problems, there is a constant need to adapt to change. As I emphasized here at last year's session [4th meeting], change is natural and inevitable. Our greatest challenge is to adapt to that change, not to resist it.
7.	Many of us here are meliorists, who hold that we can encourage change for the better and that the role of the Organization is central to the promotion of a better life for all the world's inhabitants. But even if we were not thus optimistic, we would still wish the United Nations to be effective in dealing with the problems that are within its mandate and in changing to cope with threats in the world today.
8.	Dag Hammarskjold died in 1961, along with other devoted members of the United Nations Secretariat,, to whom I also pay homage, in an attempt to assist the progress of decolonization in Africa, to preserve the territorial integrity of a newly independent State and to resist the designs of countries and interests from there and elsewhere which, for reasons of self-interest or nostalgia, meant to subvert the changes which were taking place. 1 think that Hammarskjold died with a vision of the United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping capability which was resisted then and which has been resisted since. But at least the process of political decolonization which seized our attention in those years has now been virtually completed. And, while I ask myself how many newly independent States enjoy today the sort of economic and political security and opportunity which they so bravely expected at the outset of their struggle for independence, it is perhaps illusory to tie their development to the notion of national independence. Self-determination, yes; but in 1981 we are much more deeply conscious of our global interdependence the interdependence of States, of economies, of peoples and of dangers.
9.	Economically, our interdependence is more authentically reciprocal. Twenty years ago the economic relationships between North and South were much more those of the classical form of colonial dependence. The idea that most industrialized countries of the world would by now be purchasing 30 and 40 per cent of their imported manufactured goods in developing countries would have
Seemed far-fetched in 1961. Indeed, this interdependence in trade is an increasingly important feature of our view of international economic affairs. Its reflection in international decision-making is necessary. This, as well as our concern for equity in opportunity, helps to explain why Canada is a strong supporter of the need for a global negotiating process.
10.	There has been remarkable progress in the economic development of many developing countries since 1961. But still for many in the world the basic conditions of life are just as impoverished now as they were then. The apparent inability to aid these people in the dimensions required is an indictment we must accept. But, sadly, we must also accept that the economic expectations many held for the world in 1961, and for the industrialized countries in particular, were exaggerated. Were those years of unprecedented boom an aberration? Do we need to live now 'with diminished expectations for growth in the future? If so, it is our obligation to find ways to deal with world problems within the limits of a more stringent environment now than in 1961 and to redouble our efforts, with discipline and dedication, to direct our attentions to where they are really vitally needed.
11.	Interdependence and its relationship to self-determination are a global political as well as economic reality. We are all neighbors, and strategically so. IWenty years ago the EastWest strategic focus was mainly on Europe. Today the risk of confrontation between the superPowers in areas normally considered to be part of the third world is also enhanced. There is a risk of aggravating problems already anguishing enough in terms of the turbulence and fragility of the conditions of underdevelopment and conflict indigenous to the regions in question. I call for a look backward to those contemporaries of Hammarskjold who saw in nonalignment an opportunity for developing countries to concentrate on the problems before them without the threat of interference in their affairs from more powerful countries intent on diverting their assets to their own purposes. I say that true nonalignment is not only consistent with interdependence but more necessary because of it.
12.	Is it possible that in the last 20 years the nature of EastWest tension has changed because the Soviet Union is today a military super-Power with a capability of intervention which ranges far and wide? This capability can constitute a threat to world peace as well as to the non alignment of countries as long as it is the instrument, in Afghanistan as well as in Kampuchea, of cynical real politik. Let us recognize that, if the strategic interests of great Powers are now in fact interdependent with events in the third world, then there is a need, above all, for great restraint on all our parts.
13.	All these circumstances in 1981 call for a United Nations which is more meaningful and more relevant to global concerns and events, not less. As the challenges to all of us increase in complexity and urgency, the need for more sophisticated, flexible and responsive instruments to meet them grows apace. The problems of the rest of the century and beyond englobe the ecology and use of our land, our space and our seas, as well as the security of peoples and their rising expectation in a world concentrated through technology.
14.	For instance, take the applications of nuclear technology. In 1961 most countries here were consoled by progress in negotiating a nuclear test ban treaty. It looked then as if we were headed towards a halt in the arms race. It was a brief illusion. Today it is one of the most unequivocally disturbing features of international life, and indeed of our interdependence, that the dangers of nuclear war are now even greater. Nuclear proliferation threatens on two axes: the horizontal spread of nuclear weapons to previously non-nuclear weapon States and the vertical amassing of even greater numbers of weapons by the superPowers urge in the name of sanity that this danger be recognized and resisted.
15.	We must enable the institutions of the United Nations to be more productive, not less, and we must encourage all countries to participate actively in the pursuit of solutions in these institutions. In doing so, we can demonstrate that we wish to make them relevant and productive for the general benefit, adapted to the shape of the world today. Many of my remaining remarks are directed to prospects for development in countries which were still colonies 20 years ago, and this reflects the interdependence of our interests and purposes today. But the political and economic problems of the world intersect and interact. It is important that the Organization adapt itself as well through greater sharing in the exercise of power and responsibility. Can we not ask ourselves if some of the notions of Dag Hammarskjold with regard to a stronger United Nations in the interests of world peace and security cannot today be generally seen as more reasonable than they were 20 years ago? It is my view that they are certainly every bit as necessary.
16.	Surely the continued occupation of Afghanistan by foreign military forces is an example of precisely the sort of threat to world peace and security which the United Nations was meant to prevent. The courage and determination of the resistance is an ennobling assertion of the human spirit against the machinery of military oppression, but the tragic facts reflect a basic fault in the notion of collective security. When a powerful country wishes to ignore United Nations decisions, it will feel free to do so unless its actions remain the object of continued international attention. The continued presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan is an affront to the principles of the Organization.
17.	I call on the Soviet Government to honor those principles and also the ideals of international conduct which the Soviet Union itself is pledged to follow. I ask that it respond positively to international efforts, including reestablishing a truly independent and nonaligned Government in Afghanistan, a Government which can reflect without outside interference the real will of the Afghan people.
18.	As has been emphasized by the countries of the region, the situation in Kampuchea is also a threat to peace and security. A first attempt has been made to cope with the political problems that lie at the heart of the Kampuchean question, and we now know that a settlement should cover a ceasefire on the ground, the supervised withdrawal of foreign troops, the holding of free elections under United Nations supervision and the adoption of appropriate measures to ensure that those elections are not disturbed by the armed factions in Kampuchea. Canada supports these proposals made at the International Conference on Kampuchea and contained in the Declaration of the Conference, because they appear to provide the necessary guarantees for all the parties to the conflict. We also endorse the establishment by the Conference of an ad hoc committee to study and apply the measures necessary to enable the proud Kampuchean people to decide on its own future. We urge the Members of this Organization to take this opportunity to resolve this tragic situation and to promote at long last a lasting peace in South East Asia.

19.	The self-determination sought for both Afghanistan and Kampuchea is one of the historic themes of the United Nations. It has been a central focus of the non aligned movement, of which both Afghanistan and Kampuchea are members. It was also 20 years ago this month that the first meeting of the movement was held in Belgrade. I salute what the movement has done to advance the rights of newly emerging countries.
20.	Today this ideal of self-determination is celebrated with the attainment of independence by Belize. This is an achievement for the United Nations in which Canada takes particular satisfaction as a longtime cosponsor of United Nations resolutions on the subject. While Canada is disappointed that talks between the United Kingdom, Belize and Guatemala have not led to the resolution of all outstanding issues, we are encouraged that there is a real commitment on the part of all parties to the promotion of peace in the region, which must include a Anal agreement on Belize. We are confident that the Governments of Belize and Guatemala will settle the issues between them in a peaceful and durable manner.
21.	But if the independence of Belize represents an event to celebrate, how depressing it is again to contemplate on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly the same issues affecting southern Africa that the United Nations has been pronouncing itself on for decades. I was speaking earlier of the dynamics of change in human affairs and of the futility of resisting the strength of human aspiration to self-determination. But in South Africa in 1981 resistance to change has increased. I have no doubt that justice will come for the victims of racism in South Africa, for the majority whose human dignity is abused in an affront to us all. I sympathize with the impatience of those who shudder at abiding any longer, for another generation, another decade or two, the oppression of apartheid. But I counsel wisdom in choosing methods of promoting the freedom of these people, for we must not let differences over tactics serve to weaken our unity in that purpose.'
22.	In Namibia, too, the intransigence of the South African Government remains the sole obstacle to a negotiated settlement. Our only goal is to enable the Namibian people to gain their independence at last and the right to a free and fair election in which all Namibians can take part under United Nations supervision. Canada supports unconditionally Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and the United Nations plan which theCouncil has embraced by that resolution, and we have been active, particularly in the contact group and with African States, in pursuing that goal.
23.	In the Middle East there is also conflict, and at its center is the ArabIsraeli dispute, as old as the United Nations itself. We cannot afford further delay in moving towards a negotiated settlement to this generations old conflict, a settlement in which all the interested parties must participate. Israelis and Palestinians have legitimate rights and concerns which must be taken into account, Israel's quest for security and recognized boundaries and the right to be fully accepted by its neighbors can be met only in a political, not a military, framework. The same holds true for the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their right to a homeland within a clearly defined territory the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
24.	I therefore urge all the parties concerned to summon the vision and the will required to take decisions which are as necessary as they are difficult. Among the areas where progress is urgently needed, none is more pressing than measures to ensure that the Middle East will remain free of nuclear weapons.
25.	Another early concern of the United Nations was the Korean peninsula. There too the SecretaryGeneral is performing a useful good offices role. We are encouraged by the recent initiatives of the Republic of Korea for dialog and reconciliation without conditions and for the greater integration of the peninsula into the international community.
26.	The United Nations is also playing a valuable role in Cyprus, where peacekeeping and peacemaking are proceeding in parallel under the SecretaryGeneral's leadership. We hope that the approaches now being considered in negotiations between the two communities will lead to the just and lasting comprehensive settlement they both desire.
27.	It is in Cyprus that the oldest and largest of Canada's present peacekeeping contingents is serving. Twenty-five years after the introduction of United Nations peacekeeping forces to world affairs, I see the Cyprus force as accomplishing an important role, encouraging us to believe in the notion of collective security through recourse to negotiation instead of conflict.
28.	That is also the notion involved in our attempt to advance the rule of law at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. I should like to associate myself with the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral at the opening of the tenth session of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, on 9 March, when he said:
'Apart from the achievement of the specific objectives of this Conference, I attach the highest importance to the impact which its success may have in strengthening the role of the United Nations in finding viable solutions to great global issues.'3
29.	I wish to emphasize that the Conference is not merely an attempt to codify technical rules of law. It is a resource Conference; it is a food Conference; it is an environmental Conference; it is an energy Conference; it is a conservation Conference; it is an economic Conference; it is a maritime boundary delimitation Conference; it is a territorial limitation and jurisdictional Conference; it is a transportation, communications and freedom of navigation Conference; it is a Conference which regulates all the
uses of the oceans by humanity. Most important it is a Conference which provides for the peaceful settlement of disputes concerning the oceans. It is, in other words, a Conference dedicated to die rule of law among nations.
30.	The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea ranks in importance with the San Francisco Conference founding the United Nations itself. It represents an extremely important element in the NorthSouth dialog. It has significant implications for peaceful East West relations. It touches on the interests of every State great or small, rich or poor, coastal or landlocked. The achievement of a universal agreement on a Law of the Sea Convention is fundamental to world peace and security.
31.	Of course, international peace and security, as well as development, freedom and life itself, will ultimately depend on whether we can successfully work towards arms control id disarmament. International security can be consistent with lower levels of armaments and expenditures. The coming special session on disarmament must point the way to more concrete progress than in recent years if credibility is to be maintained. Deliberations on disarmament at this session of the General Assembly can be of crucial importance in preparation. The remarkable consensus reached in 1978 needs reaffirmation and further direction.
32.	It is true that the international climate is less favorable today. At the same time, we cannot ignore the growing impatience of the world's peoples with the lack of progress towards verifiable arms limitation and disarmament agreements. Our efforts on their behalf should take into account the situation as it is in covering realistic proposals which have some substantive chance to effect change. The Canadian Government recently reaffirmed the validity of the concept of the strategy of suffocation mentioned in the Final Document of the first special session of the General Assembly on disarmament [resolution ; SJ0/2], Embracing that strategy are Canada's priorities on preparations for the second special session. They are: to encourage the continuation of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT]; to promote the attainment of a multilateral comprehensive test ban treaty; to assist in the preparation of a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons and on their destruction; to promote the evolution of an effective nonproliferation regime based on the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons; and to participate in. negotiations to limit and reduce conventional forces. Canada is committed to breaking the pattern of madness which spiraling rearmament represents, and those priorities will guide our endeavors to fulfill this commitment.
33.	I have spoken about the far reaching quests for peace, self-determination and development. These are the forces by which pervasive change can be channeled in positive directions. They are as new as today and as old as humankind; constants amid change. They have found eloquent expression in the ideals of our Charter, and I urge our re-dedication to them.
34.	But there is none so pervasive as the quest for human dignity for the individual and for his rights. That is why the United Nations enshrined in its Charter, as a primary objective, the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. There has been the development of several important
human rights instruments since, most notably the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the stewardship of the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights there is the expert and responsible role of the Human Rights Committee. It is an example of the ability of the international community to promote internationally recognized standards.
35.	The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is an equally significant covenant needing serious and expert review. There are areas in which international standards have yet to be established. We applaud the placing before this Assembly for adoption of a draft declaration on the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief.4
36.	But, while we welcome the continuing development of international human rights standards, we are deeply conscious that despite these the grossest abuses occur; the lives, freedom and integrity of innocent persons are constantly swept aside in die name of one cause, or power struggle, or another. If the United Nations provides relief unhesitatingly to the victims of natural disasters, how can we do less when the crises are man-made?,
37.	The United Nations has the means to respond. It can, for example, employ the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral; it can provide for the urgent dispatch of a special rapporteur or a mission of inquiry. All that is needed is the will to act in providing protection for those individuals or groups whose situation has become perilous in situations of social breakdown.
38.	On the subject of human rights and massive exodus, Canada welcomed the adoption of our proposal to appoint a special rapporteur. We trust that the experience of Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan in that role will lead to the adoption of a report which provides insight into how the United Nations organizations and Member States can together prevent refugee situations from reaching existing proportions. We believe that report should provide an impartial basis for examining broader aspects of international refugee problems, including, for example, the proposed initiative by, the Federal Republic of Germany regarding international guidelines for preventing massive flows of refugees.
39.	Even in more tranquil situations, there is work to be done. This is the International Year of Disabled Persons, to promote the right of more than 500 million disabled' people throughout the world to full participation and equality in a barrier-free world.
40.	And there is the position of women in all countries and the need to improve their condition socially and politically and to promote the equality of women with men. An important step in this direction is the recent entry into force, on 3 September 1981, of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
41.	Collective world concern for individual human rights and for organized efforts to promote the rights of women and the specifically disadvantaged are important recent phenomena. These issues are concerned with individuals, with the lives of people and groups of people, and will continue to receive much attention in international forums.
42.	At the level of nations, the emergence during the last 30 years of some 100 sovereign States must be counted as one of die most significant changes the world has ever seen. Dag Hammarskjold was of course centrally involved in the process of assisting these new States to enter into the life of this institution. This was a period of birth and hope. But for many of those new States, perhaps for most, this hope was quickly tempered by the economic realities which faced them.
43.	One reality which was evident immediately to the new States was that any economic interdependence which then applied was heavily skewed on the side of dependence and vulnerability for them. It was an asymmetrical relationship. The developing countries were acutely aware of this, but the developed world was not. That has now changed. I think that the change in perception on the part of developed countries towards the reality of global interdependence is of great significance, even a source of hope.
44.	The growing realization that to an increasing extent our economic futures are linked can spur us towards solutions. The Brandt Report9 has, I think, contributed in this regard. In particular, there has been an increased awareness of the contribution of the developing countries to the overall world economy. It is now projected that between 1980 and 1990 developing countries will account for more than a quarter of the increase in world trade. These statistics mask, of course, important differences among the various developing countries most involved as well as the relative impact of these changes on individual economies. But they indicate that developing countries are moving closer to the center of the world economic stage.
45.	Interdependence also has a price. It tends to make all nations more vulnerable to shocks from the outside and from forces beyond the control of national Governments. It is therefore of paramount importance that the international institutions which provide the frameworks for the international economic system function effectively. If they do not, if they become deadlocked and divided along bloc lines, or if they become hostage to narrow interests, then the international economy will suffer. In these circumstances, interdependence becomes a liability and all States suffer.
46.	Inflation, high interest rates and sluggish growth pose real problems for the industrialized countries. The constraints on export growth and financing are mounting in the middle-income developing countries. It is, however, the low-income countries, particularly the least developed, which are the most vulnerable and whose prospects are the bleakest. Whether from oil shocks or high inter-strata shocks, they have suffered most.
47.	The rising prices and diminishing supply of conventional petroleum reserves have had a major impact on all of us, but the impact of the two oil shocks of the 1970s has had a disproportionate effect on the developing countries, setting back the development plans of many of them. Canada agrees that a high priority in international action should be accorded to their energy needs. It is because energy is central to development that Canada supports the expansion of World Bank energy lending, including lending through a new energy affiliate if this were eventually feasible, to assist developing countries in their energy programs.
48.	In Canada we have responded to this need by creating a new development assistance arm of our national oil company, PetroCanada International, devoted to aiding oil-importing developing countries in the mobilization of their own energy resources, particularly hydrocarbons. Effort and imagination must also be used to seek out ways of assisting developing countries in non-petroleum sources of energy. The recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy was important in this respect, but represented a single step on a long and difficult road.
49.	Just as Canada's economic structure and expertise favor development assistance in the energy area, so we also intend to make a major contribution to helping to improve agricultural production in developing countries. While international trade in food products has increased dramatically in recent decades, many nations which were previously self-sufficient in staple products, and even significant exporters of them, have become today reliant on food imports, particularly food grains. There is a real prospect of a food crisis in the 1980s and urgent international attention is needed on this problem.
50.	I have spoken of energy and food areas where Canada can make a unique contribution but I would like also to say a few words about trade, for it is perhaps trade which, in the long run, offers the best promise of escape from the wheel of poverty for many countries.
51.	Developing countries have seized important new opportunities to increase trade among themselves. But northern markets continue to be crucial, and future prospects for expanding NorthSouth trade will depend to a large extent on the ability of industrial countries to develop effective adjustment strategies which can maintain a reasonable rate of economic growth employment. In fact, the relative significance of NorthSouth trade has grown in recent years compared with trade just among the industrialized countries. Now, a number of the most advanced developing countries represent the potential trade partnerships of greatest opportunity for many developed countries. All countries will benefit from an open, universal international trading system, and Canada will continue to pursue this goal. This would be our focus at the new proposed ministerial meeting of GATT in 1982..
52.	The export prospects of developing countries are also an increasingly important factor in the health of the international payments system and of international banking. For the foreseeable future, developing countries will continue to need substantial external finance, whether in the form of private investment, commercial loans Or concessional loans and grants. While private banking continues to play a major role in recycling, the international financial institutions must be increasingly involved. We support renewed effort by IMF and the World Bank in this direction. But for many of the low-income countries, the ability to participate in the expansion of world trade is limited; so is their access to commercial credit. If poverty in those countries is to be attacked and social justice demands this then greater amounts of concessional assistance must be directed to them. There is no way around this issue: development assistance is vital and urgently needed, and the world is not providing enough of it.
53.	The recent United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries held in Paris from 1 to 14 September 1981 was an important contribution to progress. Widespread consensus was achieved in the international community for the setting of objectives to be pursued by recipients and for the projections from donors of significant additional official development assistance in real terms during this decade. Taken together, these hold promise for advancing substantially the development of States most in need.
54.	The Substantial New Program of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries adopted in Paris not only set an important course for achieving progress with respect to the least developed countries but provides a guide for approaching vitally needed interaction between developed and developing countries on a range of subjects on the NorthSouth agenda. Key portions of the Substantial New Program of Action became known as the 'Canadian Compromise'. Canada was pleased to be associated with those vital conclusions because they demonstrated that constructive agreement can be reached on a subject of vital importance to the developing countries. In keeping with the role my country played in Paris, I urge that the momentum and techniques generated there be pursued during this session of the Assembly and during other international meetings addressing relations between developing and developed countries.
55.	As a result of the Paris achievement, which Canada helped to create, and in the context of translating that achievement into concrete reality, I am pleased to announce today that Canada will devote 0.15 per cent of its gross national product as official development assistance to the least developed countries in the coming years.
56.	This pledge is in the context of the announcement I made at the eleventh special session of the General Assembly on development last year [4th meeting] that Canada would reverse the trend of previous years and increase our official development assistance to ensure that we are soon at 0.5 per cent of gross national product as part of an effort to reach 0.7 per cent by the end of the decade. I am pleased that we have remained on that upward track.
57.	I spoke earlier of the fact that interdependence means that international economic cooperation is not a luxury. It is a vital necessity without which interdependence becomes a liability.
58.	We must look towards deeper global economic cooperation, yet solutions to world economic problems will not always be global. The progress made at the High Level Conference on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries in Caracas last May is a case in point. Relations with developing countries was the major focus of a number of high-level consultations among industrialized countries in particular the June ministerial meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Ottawa summit. I want to take this opportunity to report very briefly to the Assembly on the latter meeting.
59.	The Ottawa summit devoted considerable time to the issue of economic relations between developed and developing countries. In the communique the leaders agreed on a joint statement reflecting those discussions. They underlined an appreciation of the magnitude of the problems and a common readiness to help respond to them. Overall, the message to our developing country partners signaled the following: respect for independence and support for genuine nonalignment; commitment to cooperate in a spirit of mutual interest and interdependence; support for closer integration of developing countries into the international economic system, as well as support for their efforts to promote development within the framework of their own social values and traditions.
60.	Moreover, we sought at this meeting to address the key problems of energy, food, trade and finance in a positive and constructive way. We pledged to maintain substantial and, in many cases, growing levels of official development assistance, the major portion of which will be directed to poorer countries. Of signal importance was our affirmation at this meeting of our willingness to participate in preparations for a process of global negotiations. It has been encouraging to me that both developed and developing countries have expressed their appreciation of the results of the Ottawa Summit.
61.	Another important initiative in NorthSouth relations this year will be the meeting of 22 Heads of State and Government of North and South to be held at CaQSun. We hope that this meeting will foster understanding of the key NorthSouth issues and give political impetus to their resolution in whatever forums may be appropriate. We do not see this meeting as a substitute for global negotiations. No non-universal forum can be. But we do see it as a catalyst for them. And while the nature of the North South meeting precludes participation by, all of the interested parties, we welcome the link with the United Nations as represented by the presence at Cancun of the Secretary-General.
62.	While we admit the value of summits, however, universally determined multilateral agreements remain fundamental to our search for effective solutions to global problems. For this reason, a large degree of consensus has been reached on the launching of global negotiations. While admitting that compromise on all sides will be necessary in that process, I believe there is new willingness to face that challenge. Preparatory discussions will resume during this session, and I pledge Canada's determination to work for a successful outcome.
63.	In Canada during the past year we have taken a number of steps to enable us to play a more active and constructive role in international cooperation in those vital areas. A Parliamentary task force on NorthSouth relations submitted a major and invaluable report. It advocated strongly that Canada continue to play an active NorthSouth role, based on the principles of mutual benefit and humanitarianism, and made a series of constructive recommendations relating to energy, finance, trade, food and development assistance. Our Government has been pleased with the broad support the report has received and with the increased public awareness fostered by the Work of the task force.
64.	Parallel to the work of the Parliamentary task force, and based on it, the Canadian Government also conducted a review of NorthSouth policy. We have affirmed a number of fundamental issues, including a recognition of interdependence, the need for harmonization of external and domestic policies which have an impact on developing countries, the need to employ a variety of instruments to meet the needs of developing countries and greater integration of the South in the international economic system.
[The speaker continued in French.]
65.	We must as nations acknowledge the fact that our economic concerns, as well as many of our political, social and economic problems, are fundamentally international in nature. In an ever-changing world, the problem of the reconciliation of the fact of interdependence and the imperative need for self-determination is one of the greatest challenges facing political decision-makers. But our awareness of the complexities of interdependence and of its ramifications throughout all areas of national life must not lead us to despair, but rather to act. We must meet the challenge posed by die adaptation and development both of international institutional machinery and of our national ways of thinking to cope with those new realities and the need for change.
66.	Whatever means are used, the institutional machinery is inadequate. What is crucial is the will of all countries to make those instruments effective. Governments, whatever their national policies, must have the courage to tackle the major international problems of our day. In order to do so, they must feel confident that only through international cooperation can security, stability and justice for the world be guaranteed.
67.	Canadians have that confidence. We shall dedicate ourselves here and wherever these problems are considered to the quest for far-reaching international solutions which will affect the lives of every one of us.
The United Nations, this parliament of man, offers us a unique opportunity to examine the human condition. We are each called upon to declare our national purposes. We are all obligated to address those problems that obstruct the vision of the Charter.
158.	Let us begin with the vision. The Charter of the United Nations reflects cherished dreams of a world distinguished by peaceful change and the resolution of international disputes without resort to force.
159.	The United States believes in these dreams. They offer the best chance of justice and progress for all mankind. They promise a world hospitable to the values of our own society, including a certain idea of man as a creative and responsible individual, democracy and the rule of law.
160.	The ideals of the United Nations are therefore also American ideals. The Charter embodies American principles. It will always be a major objective of our statecraft to make the United Nations an instrument of peace.
161.	We all know that the realization of our dreams cannot depend on hope alone. Obstacles to progress must be overcome through united efforts. The threats to peace are many; suspicions persist; and the price of inaction is great. Truly we face a most difficult agenda.
162.	As 1 make these comments I am reminded that an observer once said of this annual debate: 'Every year ... a great and sacred orator . . . preaches before the assembly of nations a solemn sermon on the text of the Charter'. Today, however, 1 would like to focus instead on an issue of compelling interest: international development.
163.	International development reflects the worldwide search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity. Short of war itself, no other issue before us will affect more people, for good or ill, than this search. And peace itself cannot be truly secured if the aspirations of mankind to a better life are frustrated.
164.	Development is therefore an enduring issue. It has preoccupied the United Nations from the beginning. It will survive the agenda of this Assembly and every Assembly far into the future. And although great progress has been made we face today a crucial choice of strategy that will dramatically affect the prospects for future success.
165.	Since the Second World War the progress of development has been uneven but none the less widespread. Enormous economic growth has been registered: for example, in the last three decades average incomes have actually doubled. There have also been great advances in health. Life expectancy has increased dramatically even in the poorest countries and infant mortality has been reduced.
166.	This experience, however, has not been fully shared by all countries and the prospect for the future is now clouded by recent trends.
167.	The pattern of increasing economic growth, critical for development, has been slowed by inflation, high energy prices, severe balance of payments problems, heavy debt and slower growth of markets. Political turmoil and instability have diverted precious resources into arms and conflict. The necessary synthesis of traditional values and modernization, never easy to achieve, has grown more difficult under the impact of accelerating change.
168.	Let us dispense with illusions. We must choose today between two futures: a future of sustainable growth, an expansion of world trade and a reduction of poverty; and a future of economic stagnation, rising protectionism and the spread of poverty. As the World Bank has put it, 'By the end of the century, the difference between the two cases amounts to some 220 million more absolutely poor people' .
169.	Clearly, our task is to give a fresh Impetus to development by devising a new strategy for growth. Such a strategy begins by recognizing the highly Complex and difficult situation we face.	'
170.	The poorest developing countries require longterm and generous concessional aid from developed and other developing countries to raise productivity through broadly based education and training, improvements in health and nutrition and better infrastructure. They also need sound economic policies, particularly in the agricultural sector. Ultimately, the objective must be to involve them in the international economic system, thereby strengthening opportunities and incentives for self-sustaining growth.
171.	The middle tier developing countries have made significant progress. Nevertheless, they still suffer from widespread poverty. They are also acutely vulnerable to any economic downturn, especially in volatile commodity markets, because of their narrow range of exports. These countries need foreign capital and assistance in developing the experience and creditworthiness to borrow on international capital markets. Technical support and manpower training are important to ensure that their populations are both productive and competitive. They also need an open international trading system to encourage export development.
172.	The more advanced of the developing countries are able to maintain living standards and economic performance comparable to what some of today's industrialized countries achieved less than a generation ago. Their further development is sustained best by a strong international economy with an open capital and trading system. They must be able to pursue national policies that take advantage of the international opportunities and foster domestic adjustment. These countries also play a key role in helping poorer nations, both directly and as policy models.
173.	The capital surplus oil exporting countries need a stable and prosperous international market for their oil exports and a favorable environment in which to invest their financial assets and to develop their domestic economies. The international system must continue to evolve to reflect the growing importance of these countries as they assume increasing responsibility for the management of that system and for assisting poorer nations.
174.	Finally, the industrialized countries are today suffering from low rates of growth and high rates of inflation. They are trying to increase savings and investment in order to create employment, improve the environment, eliminate pockets of poverty and adjust to the changing competitiveness of their exports. They must sell more abroad to pay for the increased cost of imported energy.
175.	In a slowly growing world these complex and diverse requirements would become potent sources of conflict. But the struggle for the world product can be avoided. The international economy can help all countries to achieve their objectives through a strategy of growth which creates the resources and the employment needed for progress. This cannot be the task of a single nation. As die report of the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, chaired by Willy Brandt, has pointed out: 'Above all, the achievement of economic growth in one country depends increasingly on the performance of others'.4
176.	It is on this view of a differentiated and interdependent world that we must build a new strategy for growth; but our strategy must also be informed by the lessons of the past. Such lessons, extracted from hard experience, offer the basis for principles to guide us through these austere and difficult times.
177.	First, development is facilitated by an open international trading system. Developed and developing countries together face the challenge of strengthening GATT and the international trading system to create mutual export opportunities for all.
178.	Today the trading system is under enormous stress—rising protectionist pressures, new and subtle types of import barriers, restrictive bilateral arrangements, export subsidies and investment policies which distort trade. These are especially troublesome in a period of slow growth. Unless they are reduced or eliminated the international trading system will be seriously weakened. Such a setback to the world economy would inflict the most suffering on the developing countries.
179.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility to work for a more open trading system with improved rules. We also look to the more successful developing countries to play a fuller role in strengthening the trading system. It will be difficult for each of our countries individually to open markets further unless we are committed to doing so collectively.
180.	For our part, the United States has long supported open markets. Despite current complications, America remains a strong advocate of free trade. Although our gross national product is only one third of the Western industrialized group's total, the United States imports roughly one half of all manufactured goods exported by developing countries. Earnings of developing countries not members of OPEC from exports to the United States amount to some $60 billion more than double the foreign aid coming from all Western developed countries.
181.	We call upon all members of the international community to join in resisting the growth of protectionism. Developing nations must have the greatest possible opportunity to sell their commodities and manufactured products. Let us also work together to achieve a successful conclusion of the multi-fibre agreement.
182.	A dynamic and successful trading system requires a smoothly functioning international financial system. We must therefore continue to work with other countries to encourage their support for IMF and their constructive participation in the Bind's programs to facilitate adjustment. We will continue to cooperate with our developing country colleagues to strengthen the Fund. We share the view that the responsibilities of the developing countries should be increased to keep pace with their growing economic importance.
183.	Secondly, foreign assistance coupled with sound domestic policy and self-help can facilitate the development process. The United States has long believed in assistance as an effective tool in helping to promote development. Over the last three decades the United States has given more than $130 billion in concessional assistance; over the last decade alone the total has exceeded $50 billion; In 1980 the American people provided $7.1 billion, almost twice as much as any other donor.
184.	The United States has also been a major force in the creation and support of the multilateral development banks. The banks represent an important and to many countries an essential feature in the international financial system. In the last five years the United States has authorized and appropriated an average of $1.5 billion per year for support of the multilateral banks. There is no question about their value as development institutions. As intermediaries they help to mobilize the resources of international capital markets to lend to developing countries. The banks' loans for key projects are important catalysts for productive domestic and foreign private investment.
185.	We recognize that many of the poorer developing countries must continue to rely heavily on concessional assistance for some time to come. Moreover, certain kinds of vital development programs will not pay the quick and direct financial returns needed to attract private capital. For this reason a continuing bilateral assistance program and continuing support for the multilateral banks will be essential.
186.	Given today's economic conditions and the limitation on aid budgets in many countries, it is especially important that concessional assistance be utilized as effectively as possible; that it focus on countries which need it most and which use it best; and that it be a more effective catalyst for mobilizing other foreign and domestic resources. We must also recognize that a strategy for growth that depends on a massive increase in the transfer of resources from the developed to the developing countries is simply unrealistic. *
187.	Thirdly, regional cooperation and bilateral consultations can be effective in promoting development. The United States is working with other regional States to promote economic progress in the Caribbean area. We are convinced that the example of the recent multinational cooperation in the case of Jamaica and the broader Caribbean Basin initiative holds promise for other regions.
188.	We are already committed to a close working relationship with the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEAN]. We have benefited considerably from a better understanding of ASEAN's views on multilateral issues and on ways to strengthen our bilateral commercial ties. The United StatesASEAN Business Council is a model of how our private sectors can work together for mutual benefit.
189.	In Africa we look forward to a close working relationship with the Economic Community of West African States as it attempts to strengthen economic ties within the region. Constructive consultations on trade and investment issues have already occurred. We believe that mutually beneficial cooperation can be strengthened to our common benefit. Similar consultations with the developing countries of southern Africa are desirable. We have a strong interest in the economic health and stability of those nations. Commercial relationships, along with foreign assistance, will help us to attain that objective.
190.	The United States has also worked with the capital surplus members of OPEC on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis. We have been able to combine resources to attack development problems of common interest, such as food production. This cooperation should be continued and expanded.
191.	Finally, we plan to make bilateral consultative groups between our Government and those of developing countries more effective and to give full support to similar private sector arrangements. The United States Chamber of Commerce and its counterparts in many developing countries have developed particularly good relationships. We fully support these efforts and those of the private voluntary agencies. We are searching for means to work more closely with them.
192.	In all of these cases the United States recognizes the need to be sensitive to the diverse character of the societies involved and to the international circumstances in which development must occur.
193.	Fourthly, growth for development is best achieved through reliance on incentives for individual economic performance. The individual is the beginning, the key element and the ultimate beneficiary of the development process. The greatest potential for development lies in the hard work and ingenuity of the farmer, the worker and the entrepreneur. They need incentives to produce and the opportunity to benefit from their labors.
194.	Suppression of economic incentives ultimately suppresses enthusiasm and invention, and the denial of personal freedom can be as great an obstacle to productivity as the denial of reward for achievement.
195.	History cautions against regimes that regiment their people in the name of ideals, yet fail to achieve either economic or social progress. Those Governments that have been more solicitous of the liberties of their people have also been more successful in securing both freedom and prosperity.
196.	The United States can offer what it knows best from its own experience. We have seen that policies which encourage private initiatives will promote better resource allocation and more rapid economic growth. Within a framework basically hospitable to market incentives, foreign private investment can supplement indigenous investment and contribute significantly to development.
197.	But our goal is not to impose either our economic values or our judgments on anyone. In the final analysis, each country's path to development will be shaped by its own history, philosophy and interests.
198.	Fifthly, development requires a certain measure of security and political stability. Political insecurity is a major barrier to development. Fear and uncertainty stifle the productivity of the individual. Scarce resources are squandered in conflict.
199.	The close relationship between security and development cannot be ignored. We are therefore committed to maintain and, where possible, to increase programs essential to deter international aggression and to provide the domestic security necessary to carry out sound economic programs. We have no intention of providing foreign assistance, moral comfort or the prestige of international platforms to countries that foster international violence.
200.	The United Nations has a key role to play in resolving conflict and promoting international stability. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral's efforts to promote inter communal talks and a just settlement on Cyprus. We support a continuing role by the SecretaryGeneral's representative in the IranIraq conflict And South Korea's attempts to initiate a dialog with the North epitomize the search for a peaceful settlement that is at the heart of the Charter.
201.	One of the greatest dangers to the Charter today and to development itself is the willful violation of the national integrity of both Afghanistan and Cambodia by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam. Their behavior challenges the basic rights of all sovereign States. The world's hopes for peace, for security and for development will be jeopardized if 'might makes right' becomes the law of nations.
202.	The United States will continue to support security and stability as essential to progress. This is the basis of our active and continuing efforts to strengthen and expand the ceasefire in southern Lebanon. We shall also assist the negotiations specified by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in order to bring a just and lasting peace to the Middle East. Our policy is to remain a credible and reliable party in the negotiations to bring independence to Namibia on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and in a fashion acceptable to both the nations concerned and the international community.
203.	The United States also believes that efforts to control arms either among regional States or between superPowers can make an important contribution to the security that facilitates development. But these efforts do not occur in a vacuum. The international community has tended over the years to overestimate the beneficial effects of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] in dampening regional conflict. We have also tended to underestimate the impact of such conflict on the negotiations themselves.
204.	The United States is strongly committed to balanced and verifiable arms control. We are equally committed to the peaceful resolution of regional disputes. Clearly the restraint implied by arms control must become a more widespread phenomenon if such agreements are to survive and to make their proper contribution to a more secure environment for development.
205.	The United States is confident that a strategy for growth guided by these principles can succeed. We believe that three areas of action deserve immediate international attention.
206.	The first is a global expansion of trade. Plans could be formulated for the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting with special concerns of growth in mind. A major priority should be to integrate more fully the developing countries into the international trading system on the basis
of shared responsibilities and shared benefits.
207.	The second area is an increase in investment. Our common objective should be to stimulate domestic and international private investment. We must encourage and support the individual investor.
208.	The third is stronger international cooperation in food and in energy. The recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy recommended that the developing countries be assisted in assessing their energy resources and determining the best way to exploit them.3 The United Nations Development program and the World Bank have important follow-up responsibilities. We must all work to engage more effectively private participation in exploration and production in oil importing developing nations.
209.	Domestic and international action must also go hand in hand to achieve food security. The United States continues to be the largest donor of food aid and places a paramount emphasis on its bilateral program to help developing countries increase food production. Greater attention should also be given to scientific and technological research that will yield more bountiful food supplies.
210.	I have outlined today the broad principles that guide America's approach to a new strategy for growth. In the immediate future, and prior to the Cancun meeting, we will announce specific proposals to deal with this and other issues of development.
211.	These broad principles reflect our view that the United States can and indeed will continue to make an essential contribution to the process of development. We do not claim to have all the answers, but we believe that our collective responsibilities for the future allow no more time to be lost in sterile debate and unrealistic demands. The time has come for a reasoned dialog with promise for the future,
212.	The search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity has been supported by the American people, themselves an example of successful development. Our initiatives and resources, through bilateral programs, the United Nations and other multilateral agencies, have made major contributions to the process of modernization throughout the world. For the United States, support of development constitutes a practical imperative.
213.	At the Ottawa meeting the United States reaffirmed its willingness to join its partners in exploring all avenues of consultation and cooperation with developing countries. In October President Reagan will go to the meeting in Cancun. He looks forward to a genuine and open exchange of views on questions of economic development and international cooperation. That meeting offers a novel opportunity to gain fresh understandings of the problems we face together. The United States will join in a constructive and cooperative spirit. Our objective is to bring about a new era of growth. But the purpose of both growth and development goes beyond simple materialism. As Winston Churchill said: 'Human beings and human societies are not structures that are built, or machines that are forged. They are plants that grow and must be treated as such'.
214.	Despite the difficulties of the moment, we should go forward in a spirit of optimism. We have the vision bequeathed to us by this Charter. We have the potential of all the peoples represented in this Hall. Let us go forward together to achieve a new era of growth for all mankind.
I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your election as President
of the General Assembly. Your experience and wisdom
will doubtless guide us in carrying out the important
work ahead.
As we all know, that work is to immediately and
resolutely transform the high hopes of the Millennium
Summit into a better reality for the peoples for whom
the United Nations was founded.
(spoke in French)
This means assuming responsibility for our
actions and our inaction. It also means that
Governments must be ready to assume their
responsibility for their citizens.
Last week our leaders delivered here a message
of hope and determination. Their words clearly showed
that we all need the United Nations. The United
Nations is the only organization that embodies
universal values; that offers a global forum to address
common problems; and that is on the front line around
the world fighting for people.
(spoke in English)
There was another message from the Summit
about whether the United Nations is keeping up with
the times; about whether we, the Member States —
custodians of the Organization and guardians of the
Charter — have the political will to support renewal
and modernization.
When the lights turned off last Friday night here
in New York, did other lights go on around the
world — in our Chancery offices, Parliamentary
assemblies and Cabinet meeting rooms — to illuminate
the way forward? Are we all, each in our own way,
asking how we can change our ways to better help the
United Nations manage a new global agenda?
Clearly, globalization has brought unprecedented
benefits and possibilities. But it also clearly brings new
risks to people in all our countries. Many of those new
risks cross State lines, while most violent conflict now
occurs within States' borders. In both cases, the impact
is felt directly by ordinary people.
Yet the debate within the United Nations remains
driven — and too often circumscribed — by rigid
notions of sovereignty and narrow conceptions of
national interest. And action by the United Nations
remains hampered by inflexible institutional structures
that have become increasingly inward-looking, driven
by their own interests rather than by those they were
designed to serve.
The Secretary-General has, with a courage rarely
seen in public life, given us a vision of a way forward.
2

It is a vision that serves the world's people, and one
that resonates with them, even though it may aggravate
some of their Governments. He has challenged us to
follow his lead, to adopt a people-centred approach to
international relations, to move this Organization from
the sidelines to the forefront of change.
This is not a new agenda for Canada. Indeed, over
the past five years, promoting human security has been
the focus of our own approach to our changing world.
And it has been encouraging to see the shift in attitude
toward a more realistic sense of what it means to be
secure in the world as an individual.
Our leaders endorsed this new vision in their
Summit Declaration. But if we have truly come to the
understanding that security means more than protecting
borders, we must now act to turn last week's good
intentions into effective action. This means taking
responsibility to adapt our institutions, broaden
participation in their functioning, and increase
transparency and accountability to make a tangible
difference for the people we represent.
It also means responsible, accountable global
behaviour, sharing and protecting the common space
that sustains life.
Aggressive pursuit of the global arms control and
disarmament agenda is the ultimate responsible act.
Our generation built the nuclear arsenals that are
outmoded and rotting; we produced the chemical
weapons that poison people; and today we still make
and distribute the small arms that are found
everywhere: in the hands of children, the arsenals of
drug dealers and the garrisons of guerrilla fighters.
But we have also had a certain foresight to begin
building a system of international obligations and
principles to contain such behaviour. We now have to
validate and implement these instruments. Above all,
we must do nothing to damage them.
Certainly, Governments must prepare for the
defence of their people. Responsible defence is an
element of responsible government. But surely, our
responsibility to defend our citizens begins not with the
development of new weapons systems, but by
dismantling old ones: by ratifying the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT); by joining the 104
States parties to the Ottawa Treaty on landmines; by
implementing the international non-proliferation norms
and disarmament obligations embodied in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT); by
developing comprehensive action plans to stop the
proliferation of small arms and missile technology.
The collective action of States working for the
long-term security of their people is clearly the
preferable path. But where States are unable, or
unwilling, to protect their citizens, the United Nations,
and in particular the Security Council, has a special
responsibility to act.
Today, most wars are fought within failed States.
In these wars, it is the victimization of civilians that is
the motive, the means and the manifestation of a
conflict.
If the Council is to acquit itself of its
responsibility to these people, their protection must be
at the core of its work, not at its periphery.
This is the agenda that Canada has brought to the
Security Council over the past two years. It has not
been an easy task, but I would like to acknowledge that
the Security Council is meeting the new challenges. In
recent months, the Council's work has increasingly
focused on the protection of civilians, with action in
the areas of AIDS, physical protection, war-affected
children and sanctions reform. The Council has
recognized that dealing with these issues is critical to
building effective peace-support operations, and has
embodied this recognition in recent resolutions. Today,
we are providing members a checklist, a checklist of
responsible action in the Security Council.
(spoke in French)
The Brahimi report also proposes a plan of
action. It is a comprehensive strategy for strengthening
the United Nations capacity to help people. Canada
supports the panel's findings. We will be its strongest
advocate and can be counted upon to work tirelessly to
build the political support required to implement both
the spirit and the letter of its recommendations.
(spoke in English)
By far the most difficult challenge in protecting
civilians in armed conflict is in situations where abuse
is most severe: genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity, massive and systematic violations of human
rights and humanitarian law which cause widespread
suffering, loss of life and abuse.
We need a new form of deterrence against such
forms of behaviour. The establishment of an
3

International Criminal Court (ICC), which makes
impunity illegal and which holds individuals directly
accountable for their actions, is that deterrent. And if
its power to deter the abuse of people fails, the Statute
provides both a basis and a structure to take concrete
legal action to redress injustice.
The Court's Statute provides us with a unique
opportunity to fix one of the worst failings in the
international system. Today I appeal to every
Government here that has not done so to sign the Rome
Statute by December and to ratify it on an urgent basis,
so that the world's people can finally have the justice
they deserve.
Canada seeks to systematically put in place the
building blocks for a new type of international system,
one that is inspired and guided by the United Nations
Charter, but that is also prepared to deal with the
underside and underworld of globalization.
Of course, prevention is the best form of
intervention. But when preventive measures fail; when
the quiet diplomatic efforts and the targeted sanctions
do not work; when the fact-finders find facts too
horrendous to imagine; then there must be recourse to
more robust action.
The question of intervention in these instances,
including, as a last resort, the use of military force, is
fraught with difficulty and controversy. Many would
sweep it under the rug as too divisive, too difficult, too
damaging to the status quo. But Rwanda, Cambodia,
Srebrenica and Kosovo remind us that it is important to
focus on this question. It would be easy to pretend that
the humanitarian tragedies associated with these places
are a thing of the past. It would be easy, but it would be
wrong. There is no certainty that similar atrocities will
not happen again. Indeed, the opposite is more likely.
The spiral into extremes of human suffering cannot
always be constrained.
Reading the editorial page of The New York Times
on Tuesday, 12 September, we realize that some would
have us believe that the United Nations Charter was
written only to protect States and State interests:
“intervening in civil conflicts takes the United
Nations a step too far”.
I disagree. I say that in the face of egregious human
suffering it is a step in the right direction.
Nothing so threatens the United Nations very future as
this apparent contradiction between principle and
power; between people's security and Governments'
interests; between, in short, humanitarian intervention
and State sovereignty.
Last fall I stood before this body and argued that
the United Nations Charter was written for people. Our
collective agenda here is not the nation States' agenda,
or the ministers' agenda, or the diplomats' agenda. It is
the people's agenda. Indeed, “We the peoples” are the
opening words of the Charter. Those who would seek
to hide behind that document to justify inaction need
only to read its preamble to reacquaint themselves with
its original intent.
Secretary-General Annan has challenged us to
rethink what it means to be responsible, sovereign
States. Canada has responded by creating an
independent international commission on intervention
and State sovereignty. Its purpose is to contribute to
building a broader understanding of the issue, and to
foster a global political consensus on how to move
forward. The commission will be led by two co-
chairpersons — one from the developing and one from
the developed world — with the participation of a wide
range of representatives of Governments and non-
governmental organizations from all regions and under
the overall guidance of an advisory board composed of
ministers, former ministers and distinguished
practitioners from the academic, humanitarian and
legal fields.
The commission will undertake its work during
this Millennium Assembly year, and will present its
recommendations in 12 months' time. I ask those
present here in the Assembly Hall to join in this
enterprise, difficult as it may be, so that we can seek to
reconcile these concepts to find the space that we can
all share.
It is difficult, but it is not impossible. We have
done it before. Thirteen years ago, the Brundtland
Commission's report, “Our Common Future”, took two
seemingly contradictory ideas — economic
development and the protection of the environment —
and out of that contradiction forged a synthesis called
sustainable development. That new concept
fundamentally changed the way in which the world
thinks about those issues, and its work informs our
thinking to this very day. It is Canada's hope that this
new commission can diffuse the anxiety that surrounds
4

the issues of intervention and sovereignty by building a
similar bridge between our current notions of these
concepts, and in so doing help to define the way ahead
for Governments and the United Nations to tackle the
most challenging international dilemma of the twenty-
first century.
However, the responsibility no longer stops just
with Governments. The private sector must also take its
responsibility for the communities on which it depends
for its business. Ethical business is good business. The
many companies that have joined the Secretary-
General's Global Compact with Business recognize
that profit made on the backs of exploited and abused
children — by gun-running, drug dealing or conflict
diamonds — is no longer acceptable. In the globalized
economy, the world's people are the ultimate
shareholders. If they do not profit, no one will. We
must therefore work on all of these fronts and with all
of these new players to build a future where human
security is universally respected and protected. In the
meantime, there are steps that we can take to protect
the most vulnerable.
To build a world that values human security we
must start with concern and action for those who will
inherit it. It is fitting, therefore, that in this year of
fresh resolve the future of our children is a key element
of the agenda, particularly through the special session
on children that is to be held next year. Nowhere is the
safety and well-being of children more at risk than in
conflict situations. Children should have no part in war.
Yet today they are among its main victims, counting in
the millions.
(spoke in French)
Four years ago, Graça Machel brought attention
to the horrific plight of war-affected children. Since
then, action has been taken too reduce their suffering,
most notably with the appointment of Olara Otunnu as
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and, more recently, with
the historic agreement last January on the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
This week, with Graça Machel as honorary
Chairperson, Canada is hosting in Winnipeg the
International Conference on War-Affected Children.
This meeting, the first of its kind, brings together more
than 130 Governments, 60 non-governmental
organizations and private sector groups, international
organizations and young people from every region of
the world.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased that so many ministers and senior
officials from the Organization will join us in
Winnipeg this weekend. I encourage those not already
represented to attend.
The aim of the conference is twofold: to
formulate a comprehensive, global action plan and to
forge the necessary political will to implement it.
Together, we hope it will help children traumatized by
war, and ultimately eliminate their involvement and
victimization in conflict.
Earlier this week in Winnipeg, as we opened the
conference, a young Ugandan girl named Grace spoke
to me, at a meeting of young people affected by war,
about her experience as a child soldier. Her story was
one of victimization and chilling brutality. Her belief
that the international community could help her and
others like her was touching and inspiring. Her plea for
us to do so is the essence of the Organization's
vocation. Indeed, it is one of our basic responsibilities.
For me, that young woman's simple appeal makes it
clear that we have no option but to be ready, to be
willing, and to be able to forge a United Nations for the
twenty-first century.
In view of the daunting challenges ahead, any
attempt to retreat, to shut out the world or to turn away
from international engagement would be to follow a
dangerous path that is neither practical nor desirable.
The truth is that we share a common humanity. The
reality is that we are linked by the forces of history into
a common destiny. The fact is that the answers to our
problems lie in strengthening, not diminishing, global
cooperation and global solutions.
In today's world, the security of States and the
security of people are indivisible. Providing for that
security is a necessary precondition for success in other
important endeavours, such as advancing economic aid
and trade development. In this new century, too many
people like Grace are still subject to the worst of the
past century: to the scourge of war, to human rights
abuses and to too few prospects for social progress and
a better standard of living. Yet the hopes contained in
the United Nations Charter still have meaning for them,
and indeed relevance for all of us. Fulfilling its
aspirations is our enduring goal and fundamental
5

responsibility. With human security as our guide, let us
make it our focus as we renew our commitment to the
purposes of the United Nations and to a better future
for Grace and for all the people that we represent.
This goal is a responsibility that I have been
honoured to share with many of those present here over
the past five years. It is a goal that we must all
continue to strive towards — whatever our position in
life, whatever our title — in order to ensure that this
system we have built does not surrender to the cynics
who offer no alternatives, or to the game players who
paralyse the transcendent purposes of the United
Nations for simple transitory diplomatic points.
Only in so doing will we truly live up to the
promise contained in the Charter: to serve the majesty
of the people and to make this Organization work for
them.I am
honoured to address the Assembly on behalf of the
United States and to reinforce the eloquent message
President C1inton conveyed during last week's
Millennium Summit. Because my father worked here
when I was young, I have always considered myself a
child of the United Nations. And because I had the
privilege to serve here as America's Permanent
Representative, I feel at home and so will speak
plainly.
The members of this body reflect virtually every
culture, ethnicity and geographical region. We are city
and country, inland and island, tropical and temperate,
developing and industrialized. We are as diverse as
humanity.
And yet, in responding to the daunting demands
of this new era, we are bound together by the interests
we share and the ideals to which we aspire.
We all have a stake in building peace and
relieving poverty, championing development and
curbing disease. We all want to see the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction reduced, refugees
cared for, children nourished, the environment
protected, and the status of women advanced.
We all believe the benefits of globalization must
be allocated more broadly within and among societies.
Because if the new technologies are to ease the old
problems, they must help the many who today lack
access and skills, so that every village becomes a home
to opportunity and every school a midwife to hope.
As the Millennium Summit reflected, we have no
shortage of worthy goals. We are right to aim high and
take on the mightiest tasks.
But as the Secretary-General has said, progress
depends on working together. We need all hands on
deck, pulling in the same direction. For each of us, that
responsibility begins at home because the international
community cannot help any nation that is not striving
to help itself.
Each Government has an obligation to observe
international norms on human rights, uphold the rule of
law, fight corruption and raise awareness about
HIV/AIDS. But in the twenty-first century, no nation
can protect and serve its people simply by going it
alone and that is why we  all benefit from
strengthening regional bodies such as the Organization
of American States (OAS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Because of their unique expertise and regional
legitimacy, they can be instruments for solving some of
the hardest challenges we face. But they will succeed
only if we raise our expectations of these
organizations, call upon them to act boldly and back
them when they do.
Regional bodies can contribute much to the
purposes outlined in the Charter, and the goals
established during the Millennium Summit. But here
again, they cannot do it all.
8

The role of the United Nations is also vital,
because no other institution combines a comprehensive
mandate with near universal representation and global
reach.
We all have an interest in the success of the
United Nations. That is its greatest strength, and also
its burden, because 189 nations have to work very hard
if they are to agree.
I remember when I came to New York in 1993, I
was told by cynics that the United Nations was too
bureaucratic to change, and too big ever to achieve
consensus on measures to improve its governance.
Those cynics were wrong. With support from
many countries, we have made impressive progress.
Compared to seven years ago, the United Nations
accomplishes more and wastes less. Accountability has
increased and duplication diminished.
The Internal Oversight Office, which did not exist
in 1993, has grown steadily more rigorous and is
responsible for tens of millions of dollars of savings. A
culture of transparency and results is slowly but surely
taking hold. Moreover, both United Nations
Headquarters and the entire United Nations system are
better led than they have ever been.
United Nations leaders and Members can take
pride in the gains made, but we all know there is much
more work to be done.
That is why we must back the Secretary General's
efforts to further improve United Nations management,
recognizing that every dollar wasted is a dollar lost to
the fight against poverty and to the achievement of
other urgent goals.
We must also move ahead rapidly to strengthen
peacekeeping, because it is the most visible and vital
yardstick of United Nations success and, for people in
strife-torn regions, often means the difference between
a normal life and no life at all.
There is no magic formula for curing the ills that
have plagued United Nations peace operations in the
past. But the report, just prepared by Ambassador
Brahimi's team, is a solid place to start.
As President Clinton said last week, we need to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers can be
deployed with the right training and equipment and the
right rules of engagement so they can achieve, not
merely attempt, their missions.
This will require a larger peacekeeping staff, on
permanent assignment, comprised of the best talent and
experience we can find.
It will require military planners the world over to
recognize that training for peace operations is a
legitimate part of every nation's security strategy. It
will require the ability to deploy rapidly not only
United Nations military forces, but also civilian police
and experts in law enforcement and judicial reform. It
will demand improved coordination between military
peacekeepers and civilian builders of peace, so that
missions begun are completed and recovery bred by
reconciliation can take hold.
And it will require additional resources from my
Government and from each of yours. And by
“additional”, I mean resources that should not come at
the expense of other core United Nations goals.
The United States will heed the Secretary-
General's request that we work together to consider
and implement the best recommendations of the
Brahimi report.
Whether for peacekeeping or programmes, the
United Nations also needs a sustainable and equitable
system of financing. We do not have that today.
Member States, including my own, must do a better job
of making payments on time. But we must also look
afresh at the method used to allocate responsibility for
United Nations costs.
Last week, the Security Council called for
adjustments in the scale of assessments. This plea has
been echoed by dozens of other countries and should
be acted upon by the General Assembly this fall.
A more equitable system should provide a much
stronger foundation for United Nations programmes
and missions. It should preserve the special
responsibility for peacekeeping of the Security
Council's permanent members. It should retain a
heavily discounted rate for the poorest countries. And
it should reduce the United Nations overall reliance on
payments from the United States, while at the same
time enabling my Government to write a check to the
United Nations for nearly $600 million in prior
obligations.
9

Clearly, adjustments are long overdue. The
United Nations needs a firm and reliable financial base.
In the weeks ahead, the United States will be pleased to
work with members to accomplish this landmark goal.
Further improvements in management and
peacekeeping and a sounder financial base are a vital
step towards a stronger and more effective United
Nations. But we must also stand up to the campaign
launched by Baghdad against the United Nations
authority and international law.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) provides
an effective plan for protecting world security through
resumed weapons inspections and monitoring inside
Iraq. It has expanded the oil-for-food programme that
has delivered $8 billion in humanitarian supplies to
Iraqi civilians, with $6 billion more on the way. And it
would enable Iraq, through compliance with the
resolution's terms, to achieve an early suspension of
sanctions. Thus far, Baghdad has flatly refused to
accept the resolution. The regime's strategy is to ignore
its United Nations Charter obligations and to seek to
preserve at all costs its capacity to produce the
deadliest weapons humanity has ever known.
We must continue to do all we can to ease the
hardships faced by Iraq's people. But we must also
defend the integrity of this institution, our security and
international law.
The Millennium Summit illustrated the United
Nations long-standing role as a forum for articulating
consensus goals. But achieving these objectives will
require action at all levels, from local to global. It will
also require a willingness to move well beyond the
limits and habits of the past.
Today, the United Nations is taking on a wide
array of new issues, what I call “people issues”,
because they so directly affect the lives of our citizens.
They include the challenge of protecting our planet by
limiting greenhouse gas emissions; securing safe water
supplies; halting desertification; and putting a stop to
trafficking in human beings. They especially include
the fight against HIV/AIDS, which was highlighted in
a letter to the Secretary-General signed by the women
Foreign Ministers last night. These and similar
challenges are sure to be important components of
twenty-first century diplomacy, and because they are
global in scope, require a global response.
The United Nations is also playing an increased
role in areas where cold war divisions once held it
back. Over the past decade, United Nations entities
have contributed much by prosecuting war criminals,
promoting democracy, supporting human rights and
aiding the fight against illegal drugs.
These issues require a willingness to take a stand,
as the United Nations has done in holding accountable
the perpetrators of ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and the
Balkans; striving to end rebel outrages in Sierra Leone;
and expressing opposition to the long-standing and
ongoing violation of basic human rights in Burma.
Let me say this morning that when the Burmese
Government tries to blame the victims for the crime,
and say that Aung San Suu Kyi and her party are
responsible for their own repression, I can only reply
that much the same was once said about Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Václav
Havel. The world is not fooled, and we must not be
silent.
Some argue that speaking out in defence of
human rights constitutes interference in internal affairs.
I believe it helps to fulfil the purposes of the United
Nations Charter, because when international norms are
assaulted, the United Nations must do more than
simply observe injustice, or report upon it, or
sympathize with the victims. We must do all we can,
where we can, to stop the perpetrators.
This requires the active backing and participation
of United Nations Members, so that respect for
international law becomes steadily more universal and
the incentives for observing global standards
progressively more clear.
The result, if we are united and determined
enough, will be a world of greater security, justice and
peace. Realistically, this is essential, if we are to
achieve the ambitious social goals we have set.
But there is one other essential element as well,
and that is democracy. This past summer in Poland, for
the first time, more than 100 nations came together to
reaffirm democratic principles and ensure that the
democratic tide remains a rising one around the world.
We did this not because democracy always
produces good Governments, for it does not. But we
are convinced by the evidence of the old century that
the hopes we share for the new will more readily be
10

accomplished if people are able to live and work in
freedom.
Democracy is the one road we can all walk down
together and the best system yet devised for sowing
and growing the seeds of economic opportunity.
In promoting democracy, we are not attempting to
impose our values on anyone else. In fact, this is not
possible, because democracy, by definition, enables
citizens within a country to shape their own destinies in
accordance with their own convictions and ideals.
Make no mistake. In any country, at any time,
dictatorship is an imposition. Democracy is a choice.
As we have learned during the last 55 years, the
United Nations provides no guarantees of global peace
or prosperity. But it can play a vital role as catalyst and
coordinator, and as a bridge connecting the
contributions of one to another.
To those who would judge it harshly, I would
respond not by pointing first to the deliberations of
diplomats such as myself, in surroundings such as
these. Instead, I would point to the day-to-day efforts
of United Nations workers caring for refugees, feeding
children, providing shelter and preventing disease.
I would point to the men and women on the front
lines, from Port-au-Prince to Freetown, and from
Kosovo to Kisangani, doing some of the world's
hardest work, and, as we have been reminded by the
recent slayings of employees of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
East Timor, also the most dangerous. It is their efforts
and sacrifice, in partnership with so many indigenous
and other non-governmental organizations, that truly
remind us of the United Nations purpose and of our
kinship with one another.
This is, I expect, my last official speech to a
United Nations audience. As I stand before you, I am
deeply conscious not only of our many
accomplishments, but also of the tasks not yet
completed.
I am grieved by the conflicts that still rage, and
the basic rights and freedoms still denied. I am
frustrated by the gaps that still exist between our ideals
and actions, and alarmed by the deepening material
divide that ultimately threatens every nation, rich and
poor alike.
There are those who say it is naïve to think that
the future can be made better than the past. I am
reminded that this institution was founded by men and
women who were as realistic as any human beings
could be, for they were the survivors of the worst
conflict our world has known and determined that
succeeding generations should be saved from holocaust
and war. They had faith. Surely we, as well, must have
faith that by working together within and outside this
Organization, we can move together, step by step
towards the lofty goals we have set, and thereby bring
about a world more peaceful, prosperous and free than
it has ever been. Since 1993, it has been my privilege
to work with so many of you, from every part of the
globe, in support of the interests we have in common
and the dreams our people share.
This morning, I want to thank you for your
friendship; pledge my cooperation in the months
immediately ahead; and ask respectfully, in turn, for
yours. I promise, as well, to serve the cause of
international progress and individual liberty not only
for as long as I am in office, but for as long as I am
alive. Once again the nations of the world meet 
in full assembly in this Hall to discuss the state of our world, to report on 
our actions of the past year, and to express the focus of our intentions in 
the coming years. Many of us had hoped that this might be a time for 
celebration, a time for rejoicing, as the deep freeze of a lengthy cold war 
gave way to the soothing warmth of a new era of enlightenment, understanding, 
caring and purpose. 
But we have little joy, and our celebration was certainly short-lived. 
Whatever insights we may have gained from the cruel and terrible events of the 
past half century are sorely needed now, in a world that breeds new forms of 
tyranny, hatred and brutality almost on a daily basis. Many people in this 
Hall have seen the evidence up close: the bullets, the bodies, and the fear 
in ordinary men and women, frequently in their own countries. 
There is, however, no need to lose hope: we have the capacity, and we 
must continue to build for the future. What we need is the collective will, 
and I believe that it is in this United Nations, this global forum, that we 
must dedicate ourselves to securing the peace and stability which have evaded 
many generations before us, and must build a new world, individual by 
individual, nation by nation. 
But, we must remove the double standards that are everywhere. What good 
are words spoken in this Hall if people at home are unable to speak freely? 
Why exercise the art of diplomacy here, if it is not supported at home by the 
science of justice and the skilful application of the rule of law? Can we 
hope to manage, together, an ever more challenging world when many of our own 
houses are in disorder? 
We in Canada, at this very moment, are engaged in our own process of 
rebuilding, rededication and renewal, a continuing process in real 
democracies. In four weeks, millions of Canadians will exercise the ultimate 
democratic right by deciding, through their votes, whether to accept or reject 
a proposal for fundamental reform of our Canadian Constitution. If accepted, 
and I have no doubt that it will be, this reform will build on the values and 
rights which are already a proud part of the Canadian reality. It will 
strengthen existing guarantees and protection for the rights of minorities, 
improve the functioning of our already highly regarded democratic 
institutions, bring greater social and economic justice to our native peoples, 
and reallocate fundamental roles and responsibilities between levels of 
government, 
I am confident that the vast majority of Canadians will support this 
reform because it is based on fundamental values to which every Canadian 
subscribes: unswerving respect for the rights of the individual, supported by 
the rule of law; a strong and deep attachment to democracy, its values and its 
institutions; a passionate commitment to social justice and economic progress 
for all; respect for national and international obligations; and a will to 
resolve differences peacefully through conciliation, compromise and consensus.* 
As Canadians, we have learned that democracy and freedom can be 
maintained only by vision and constant vigilance. New ideas for the future 
must be grounded in the fundamentals that were the original basis for our 
unity. As Prime Minister Brian Mulroney told Canadians in introducing our 
Constitution: 
'What Canada's leaders have produced is a series of constitutional 
reforms that strengthen the bonds that brought us together in 1867. 
These reforms renew the concepts that are at the core of Confederation. 
They provide a strong framework, a solid foundation, to let us move 
confidently into the future together.' 
Obviously, a strong and united Canada is important for Canadians, but it is 
also of fundamental importance to the nations of the world. 
The values which Canadians hold, and which we have brought to the world 
throughout our first 125 years as a nation, are also the values which are 
fundamental to the Charter of this Organization. 
It is our belief that here at the United Nations we are not in need of 
better principles; the drafters of the original Charter have served us well. 
What we need from this Organization and its Members is the will to act. And 
we need deeper understanding of the root causes of conflict between nations, 
so that together we can 
'break the chain of violence,... defuse the lust for revenge,... voice 
[the peoples'] needs,... affirm their dignity' (A/40/PV.47. p. 23) 
as our Prime Minister said in this Assembly on the fortieth anniversary of the 
United Nations seven years ago. 
I believe that the United Nations has taken up that challenge, and I 
salute the Secretary-General for his vision and leadership and for his courage 
in making the Organization more relevant in and to our time. His report, 'An 
Agenda for Peace' (A/47/277), lights our path to the future. 
The Secretary-General also made the important link between peace nations 
and peace within nations when he pointed out: 
'There is an obvious connection between democratic practices such as 
the rule of law and transparency in decision-making and the 
achievement of true peace and security in any new and stable political 
order.'(A/47/277, para. 59) 
There are within nation-States three fundamental weaknesses which can 
cause disputes that go beyond their borders. Primary among these is the 
absence or abuse of fundamental human rights. If people have no rights, they 
have no hope; if they have no hope, eventually they will have no fear; and if 
they have no fear, they will seek any possible means to restore their rights, 
even killing and dying in the trying. It is a pattern for instability, a 
pattern for failure, one that has been repeated all too often in the past. 
The United Nations must lead in the field of human rights. In El 
Salvador, Cambodia, Croatia, Bosnia, and Somalia efforts to protect human 
rights are of fundamental importance in attempts to bring peace to these 
troubled lands. Canada, by the way, is currently serving in all of those 
places. 
The 1993 World Conference on Human Rights offers a unique opportunity 
for all Members of the United Nations to work in a constructive and 
cooperative spirit to strengthen the foundation of universal respect for human 
rights. 
Particularly insidious among the forms of human-rights abuse is 
systematic discrimination, whether based on gender, race, or ethnic origin. 
Violence against women remains one of the most serious forms of 
human-rights abuse. Canada initiated and strongly supports the current work 
in the United Nations for the adoption of a universal declaration on violence 
against women, 
In another context, to eliminate employment discrimination we must also 
ensure the election and appointment of more women to senior positions in 
national and international decision-making bodies, including the United 
Nations. This has been a cornerstone of my Prime Minister's domestic and 
international appointments policy. 
But no group should be marginalized; all views, all experiences are 
important. To this end, Canada is proud to be at the forefront of efforts to 
prepare for the International Year for the World's Indigenous People, 1993, 
when the international community will turn its attention as never before to 
the rights of the world's indigenous peoples. Our recently concluded 
constitutional negotiations in Canada include major advances for indigenous 
peoples in our own country, which will end years of injustice and inequality 
in some aspects. 
As this special Year begins, we also mark the end of the Decade of 
Disabled Persons. We must continue to remove barriers to the full 
participation and integration of persons with disabilities. It is our 
hope that a consensus for ongoing collaboration can be reached in Montreal, 
where on 8 and 9 October my colleague, the Honourable Robert de Cotret, 
Canada's Secretary of State, will host an international meeting of Ministers 
responsible for persons with disabilities. 
This past year has seen the resurgence of a particularly vile form of 
abuse of human rights. Canada protests in the strongest possible terms the 
abhorrent practice of 'ethnic cleansing'. Whatever reason for it, wherever it 
exists, it represents the basest form of inhumanity and abuse of the 
individual, and cannot be tolerated by the world community and this 
Organization. 
In this connection, Canada calls for the drafting of a statute by the 
International Law Commission to establish an international criminal court. 
For this purpose, Canada will shortly convene an international meeting of 
experts to mobilize legal expertise on this important matter. 
A second major weakness within many nation-States is the absence of a 
developed system of democratic values and institutions, and this, too, may 
ultimately lead to conflict, 
One should not be fooled by the outward trappings of democracy. How can 
peace flourish when a democratically elected leader is placed under house 
arrest, as in Myanmar, or a democratically elected Government is violently 
overthrown, as in Haiti? 
A true and lasting democracy requires time and understanding, like a 
true and lasting friendship. And it requires two-way trust between a nation's 
peoples and its leaders. 
We recognize the enormous challenges facing countries where democracy is 
in its early stages. We must all promote a climate of trust within these 
emerging democracies, so that new ideas have time to flourish and take root. 
Canada is doing this through its aid programmes and by its participation in 
the social and economic agencies of the Organization. 
A third major weakness within nation-States is the inability to make 
responsible choices in the management of public policy. Good governance is 
important, because it ensures that in the provision of government programmes 
and the distribution of government resources adequate attention is paid to 
social justice, health and education. It also promotes equitable economic 
opportunity through the development of a free market system. Ultimately, 
these are the means to defeat poverty and to ensure that arms purchases and 
spending on the military are not excessive. 
Canada's own assistance to developing countries is increasingly focused 
on and tied to their efforts to protect basic human rights, to develop 
democratic values and institutions, and to undertake good governance in their 
policies and programmes. 
We urge other Member States and the General Assembly to adopt a similar 
philosophy and similar practices if we are to eradicate the seeds of conflict 
from within nation-States. 
These are, of course, resolutions for long-term prevention of conflict. 
In the meantime, however, we cannot ignore the current state of the world, and 
that is why the Secretary-General's report, 'An Agenda for Peace', is such an 
important and pivotal document for this General Assembly. 
Canada is no stranger to the process of bringing peace to, and keeping 
peace, in all the regions of the world. 
Of the 45,000 peace-keeping forces currently serving under the United 
Nations flag, close to 4,300, or almost 10 per cent, are Canadian. No other 
nation has made a greater commitment to United Nations peace-keeping than 
Canada. Canada has served in virtually every United Nations peace-keeping 
mission, and Canadians currently serve in such varied missions as those in 
El Salvador, Cambodia, the former Yugoslavia, Somalia and the Middle East. 
Our experience in these and other missions has taught us that no two 
missions are the same, and our experience has also taught us that 
peace-keeping, which is not even mentioned in the United Nations Charter, is a 
dynamic concept that must be further refined to meet the challenges of the 
1990s and beyond. Consequently, we are very pleased that the 
Secretary-General consulted so broadly on this matter, and we are also pleased 
that much of our own experience and many of our suggestions are reflected in 
his final report. 
We commend the Secretary-General's emphasis on preventive diplomacy and 
peace-making as the preferred options. We encourage him to continue to use 
all of the means at his disposal to defuse crises, from fact-finding missions 
to mediation. We consider it the duty of all Member States to share with the 
Secretary-General all information that can help him to fulfil his role. 
We strongly support the concept of preventive peace-keeping, and we urge 
the Security Council to adopt this option when lives can be saved, 
confrontation averted or democracy stabilized. In Kosovo, for example, 
preventive diplomacy by the Security Council and the Secretary-General may 
well prevent bloodshed and anarchy such as is seen in much of the rest of the 
region. 
In the area of peace-making, we agree that the Secretary-General should 
continue to use mediation and negotiation to facilitate the process of peace, 
and that the Security Council should avail itself of the provisions of the 
Charter that permit it to recommend appropriate measures for dispute 
settlement. 
We also agree that there is a broader role for the International Court of 
Justice and that pursuant to Article 96 of the Charter, the Secretary-General 
be authorized to take advantage of the advisory competence of the Court. 
I have already alluded to the 4,300 Canadian men and women, 20 per cent 
of our military forces, who are currently committed to United Nations 
peace-keeping operations. Canada has for many years maintained a battalion on 
stand-by for United Nations peace-keeping operations. We also have a 
longstanding policy whereby members of other Canadian forces can be and have 
been called upon for peace-keeping duties. We are prepared to confirm 
Canadian arrangements through an exchange of letters with the Secretariat, as 
suggested in the Secretary-General's report. We urge other countries to do 
the same. 
We agree with the need to make available human-rights monitors, electoral 
officials, refugee and humanitarian specialists and police whatever the 
situation calls for. We have committed, for example, 45 members of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police to serve with United Nations civilian forces in the 
former Yugoslavia. And let me add, we believe that countries that make 
available such civilian experts to the United Nations should have their 
supplemental costs reimbursed. 
Whereas 'peace-keeping' has become very much central to United Nations 
action and philosophy, the concepts of 'peace enforcement' and 
'peace-building' are less familiar. We in Canada believe, however, that both 
will have an increasing role in the future, if the international community is 
truly dedicated to ending conflict and to enhancing democracy. 
Of the two, the use of 'enforcement' is the more controversial. Recent 
events demonstrate that the use of force may be a necessary option, and we 
urge full consideration of the Secretary-General's views in this regard. For 
our part, we insist on the right of Member States to take part in any decision 
involving their nationals. We also believe that further work is required on 
an urgent basis to determine the circumstances under which enforcement 
activities should be undertaken and the limits of potential enforcement action. 
'Peace-building', on the other hand, has been undertaken, most notably in 
the multidimensional United Nations activities in Cambodia and El Salvador. 
These operations are long, difficult and costly. 
Building lasting peace is critical despite those obstacles, not only 
because of the stability, opportunity and safety it brings to the people most 
directly affected, but because in the long run it is less difficult, less 
disruptive, and probably less costly than continued hostilities. 
Canada, while active in both El Salvador and Cambodia, is fully prepared 
as well to assist the United Nations in expanding and shaping its approach to 
peace-building in the future. 
We support the Secretary-General's proposals for improving the 
effectiveness and timeliness of peace-keeping operations, and, most notably, 
for the establishment of a peace-keeping start-up fund of $50 million, and the 
other proposals in his report. 
All Member States must pay their dues fully and on time. In May of this 
year, in the presence of the Secretary-General, Prime Minister Mulroney noted 
publicly that money is the clearest measure of political will. He went on to 
say: 
'The Secretary-General of the United Nations, the holder of one of 
the most important offices in the world, should not be treated as a 
modern-day mendicant, forced to wander around wealthy capitals imploring 
the decision-makers to pay their bills so that the United Nations can do 
its job the next day. He must be free to devote his entire time and 
energy to running the United Nations and solving global problems, rather 
than passing the hat for peace and security.' 
Financing a la carte will, over time, erode the United Nations financial 
base and also weaken the commitment of Member States to the broad range of its 
activities. 
Canada is opposed to the recent decision of the Security Council to 
enlarge the mandate of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) at no 
cost to the United Nations, with the cost to be borne by the participating 
countries. This sets an unfortunate precedent, and it goes against the United 
Nations principle of collective responsibility. 
We also have serious concerns about certain long-standing missions, such 
as the one in Cyprus, where Canadians and others have served for 28 years. In 
Cyprus an entire generation has grown up regarding the presence of 
peace-keepers as part of their everyday norm. 
We cannot allow the parties in any dispute to institutionalize permanent 
peace-keepers so that they are just another aspect of the status quo. This is 
simply unacceptable. The parties involved must accept their responsibility 
directly and work with the Secretary-General to find a resolution without 
further delay. 
We are interested in the Secretary-General's suggestion for increasing 
cooperation with regional arrangements and organizations in functions such as 
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping, peace-making and peace-building. I 
myself have encouraged the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to 
develop some of these mechanisms, and Canada, working within the Organization 
of American States, remains dedicated to a return to democracy in Haiti. 
There is no doubt in my mind that regional efforts in preventive 
diplomacy and peace-making should be encouraged. I hope that future 
developments in those institutions will enable them to carry out peace-keeping 
operations under certain circumstances. But it is the United Nations which 
will continue to have the ultimate authority. 
Expanding the circle of peace-keeping and peace-making organizations may 
serve to reduce some of the disproportionate burden that in the past certain 
countries, such as Canada, have willingly assumed. Future needs, however, 
will require a broadening of participation by Member States. 
Member States also have a direct responsibility to reduce the numbers and 
kinds of weapons that are available for conflict. Last year we in this 
Assembly took a major step to increase transparency in arms sales and to 
inhibit excessive build-ups of conventional weaponry, with the establishment 
of the United Nations arms register. This year we can take two even more 
important steps. The General Assembly, at this session, will launch the 
preparations for the extension of the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty in 
1995. An indefinite extension is the only option. 
France and Russia have declared nuclear-testing moratoriums. Other 
nuclear Powers the United States, the United Kingdom and China have no 
reason not to join them. All nuclear-weapon States should observe an 
immediate moratorium on nuclear testing and should summon up the political 
will and energy to negotiate a comprehensive test-ban treaty. 
We are seeing some progress. After many years of difficult negotiations, 
our negotiators at the Conference on Disarmament have succeeded in producing 
a chemical-weapons Convention that, when implemented, will ban all chemical 
weapons for ever. I urge all Member States to join Canada as original 
signatories when that Convention is opened for signature in Paris next year. 
There are other substantive issues that I should have liked to discuss in 
greater detail before the General Assembly today - notably, the follow-up to 
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 
Rio de Janeiro, where Canada's Prime Minister expressed his strong support for 
conventions on climate change and on biological diversity, in a ringing call 
to action: 
'As political leaders', 
he told his fellow nation-builders, 
'our job is to force the pace and stretch out the limits of international 
cooperation. Nations ... have the human genius to create a world free 
from deprivation and secure from degradation. What remains is for 
Governments to provide the leadership the world so desperately needs.' 
The job of the General Assembly is to continue to stretch those limits and to 
demonstrate that leadership through the establishment of a commission on 
sustainable development and a conference on the high seas. 
There are as well, of course, many issues of process, such as reform of 
the United Nations development system, that require our immediate time and 
attention. Canada put forward detailed proposals in this regard in July in 
the Economic and Social Council, and will continue to take an active role and 
interest in this matter. 
What a large task we have set for ourselves. But one of the lessons that 
we have learned in the post-cold-war era is that there is no breathing space, 
there is no long pause for contemplation and reflection. Decisions must be 
made on a timely basis, and when those decisions are made, all Member States 
must vigorously support and abide by them. 
Last month, at the London Conference on the former Yugoslavia, I made it 
clear that Canada is losing patience with much of the posturing that, 
historically, has masqueraded as international diplomacy. I know that others 
in the Assembly share this frustration. But, as we speak, the body count 
rises in what is left of Bosnia and Herzegovina not to mention the thousands 
of men, women and children who are facing starvation in Somalia. The United 
Nations needs the commitment of its Member States, it needs well-thought-out 
and timely decisions, and it needs follow-up action. Anything less is failure. 
Let us not spend the next four or five years debating the niceties of 
this principle or that concept; let us all get on with the everyday job of 
building peace and security. No one should be here who is not prepared to 
work towards those noble objectives, and no one should leave here without 
confirming his or her commitment to working together for the benefit of all 
the peoples of the world. Forty-seven years ago I was a young man of 21, and, 
like thousands of others of my generation, I had gone off to war to help keep 
freedom alive. Forty-seven years ago this month the war was finally over, and 
I was looking forward to peace and the chance to begin my life in earnest: 
1945 marked a moment of promise, not just for me, but for all of mankind. A 
great struggle against dictatorship had been fought and won. Across the 
globe, we all looked forward to a future free of war, a world where we might 
raise our children in peace and freedom, and this institution, the United 
Nations, born amidst the ashes of war, embodied those hopes and dreams like no 
other. 
But the hopes and dreams of 1945 remained unfulfilled: communist 
imperialism divided the world in two, our hopes for peace and our dreams of 
freedom were frozen in the grip of cold war, and, instead of finding a common 
ground, we found ourselves at Ground Zero. Instead of living on Churchill's 
The President returned to the Chair. 

'broad, sunlit uplands', millions found that there was, as Arthur Koestler so 
chillingly wrote, 'Darkness at Noon'. Instead of uniting the nations, this 
body became a forum for distrust and division among nations and, in a cruel 
irony, the United Nations, created to free the world of conflict, itself 
became conflict's captive. 
I too lived through those disputes; I sat where you sit, proudly so; I 
served in this Assembly and I saw, in my time, the consequences of the cold 
war's hot words on the higher missions of the United Nations. Now, 47 years 
later, we stand at the end of another war, the cold war, and our hopes and 
dreams have awakened again. Driven by its own internal contradictions and 
banished by the peoples' undying thirst for freedom, imperial communism has 
collapsed in its birthplace, and today Russia has awakened democratic, 
independent and free; the Baltic States are free; and so too are Ukraine, 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and the other independent States joining the 
nations of Central and Eastern Europe in freedom. 
The fear of nuclear Armageddon between the super-Powers has vanished, and 
we are proud to have done our part to ensure that our schoolchildren do not 
have to practise hiding under their desks for fear of nuclear attack, as the 
generation before them did. I am proud also to salute the courageous leaders 
with nuclear responsibilities Presidents Yeltsin, Kravchuk, Nazarbayev, 
Shushkevich who joined me in ending the super-Power stand-off that risked 
nuclear nightmare. This is the first General Assembly session to seat you as 
truly independent and free nations, and to you and the leaders of the other 
independent States, I say welcome home: we are now truly united nations. 

With the cold war's end, I believe we have a unique opportunity to go 
beyond artificial divisions of a first, second and third world to forge 
instead a genuine, global community of free and sovereign nations, a community 
built on respect for principle, on peaceful settlement of disputes, on 
fundamental human rights and on the twin pillars of freedom: democracy and 
free markets. Already, the United Nations, especially the Security Council, 
has done much to fulfil its original mission and to build this global 
community. 
United Nations leadership has been critical in resolving conflicts and 
brokering peace the entire world over, but securing democracy and securing the 
peace in the century ahead will be no simple task. Imperial communism may 
have been vanquished, but that does not end the challenges of our age, 
challenges that must be overcome if we are finally to end the divisions 
between East and West, North and South, that fuel strife and strain and 
conflict and war. 
As we support the historic growth of democracy around the world, I 
believe the community of nations and the United Nations face three critical, 
interrelated challenges as we enter the twenty-first century. 
First, we face the political challenge of keeping today's peace and 
preventing tomorrow's wars. As we see daily in Bosnia, Somalia and Cambodia, 
everywhere conflict claims innocent lives; the need for enhanced peace-keeping 
capabilities has never been greater; the conflicts we must deal with have 
never been more intractable, the costs of conflict higher. 
Second, we face the strategic challenge of the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, truly the fastest growing security challenge to 
international peace and order. 

Third, we face the common economic challenge of promoting prosperity for 
all, of strengthening an open, growth-oriented, free-market international 
economic order while safeguarding the environment. 
Meeting these challenges will require us to strengthen our collective 
engagement; it will require us to transform our collective institutions; and, 
above all, it will require that each of us look seriously at our own 
Government and how we conduct our international affairs. We too must change 
our institutions and our practices if we are to make a new world of the 
promises of today, if we are to secure a twenty-first century peace. 
 
With you today I would like to discuss these three challenges: 
peace-keeping, proliferation and prosperity. And I should like to use this 
opportunity to begin to sketch how I believe the international community can 
work together to meet these three challenges and how the United States is 
changing its institutions and policies to catalyze this effort. 
Let me begin with peace-keeping. The United Nations has a long and 
distinguished history of peace-keeping and humanitarian relief. From Cyprus 
and Lebanon, to Cambodia and Croatia, the blue beret has become a symbol of 
hope amid all that hostility. And the United Nations has long played a 
central role in preventing conflicts from turning into wars, and strengthening 
peace-keeping capabilities can help buttress these diplomatic efforts. But, 
as much as the United Nations has done, it can do much more. 
Peace-keepers are stretched to the limit while the demands for their 
services increase by the day. The need for monitoring and preventive 
peace-keeping putting people on the ground before the fighting starts - may 
become especially critical in volatile regions. This is especially the case 
because of the rapid and turbulent change that continues to shake Eastern 
Europe and Eurasia. Across the lands that once were imprisoned behind an iron 
curtain, peoples are reasserting their historical identities that were frozen 
in communism's catacomb. 
Where this is taking place in a democratic manner with tolerance and 
civility and respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, this new 
democratic nationalism is all to the good. But, unfortunately, we need only 
look to the bloody battles raging in places such as the former Yugoslavia to 
see the dangers of ethnic violence. This is the greatest threat to the 
democratic peace we hope to build with Eastern Europe, with Russia and 
 
Eurasia, even more than economic deprivation. We fully support the efforts of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Western European Union (WEU), the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and other competent regional 
organizations to develop peace-keeping capabilities. 
We are convinced, however, that enhanced United Nations capabilities are 
a necessary complement to these regional efforts, not just in Europe and 
Eurasia, but across the globe. 
I welcome the Secretary-General's call for a new agenda to strengthen the 
ability of the United Nations to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts across 
the globe. Today I call upon all Members to join me in taking bold steps to 
advance that agenda. I will therefore be discussing with my colleagues the 
merits of a special meeting of the Security Council to discuss the 
Secretary-General's proposals and to develop concrete responses in five key 
areas. 
First, robust peace-keeping requires men and equipment that only Member 
States can provide. Nations should develop and train military units for 
possible peace-keeping operations and humanitarian relief and these forces 
must be available on short notice at the request of the Security Council and 
with the approval, of course, of the Governments providing it. 
Secondly, if multinational units are to work together, they must train 
together. Many nations for example, Fiji, Norway, Canada and Finland have 
a long history of peace-keeping and we can all tap into that experience as we 
train for expanded operations. Effective multinational action will also 
require coordinated command and control and inter-operability of both 
equipment and communications. Multinational planning, training, field 

exercises will be needed. Those efforts should link up with regional 
organizations. 
Thirdly, we also need to provide adequate logistical support for 
peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. Member States should designate 
stockpiles of resources necessary to meet humanitarian emergencies, including 
famines, floods and civil disturbances. This will save valuable time in a 
crisis. 
Fourthly, we will need to develop planning, crisis management and 
intelligence capabilities for peace-keeping and humanitarian operations. 
Fifthly, we must ensure adequate equitable financing for United Nations 
and associated peace-keeping efforts. 
As I said, we must change our national institutions if we are to change 
our international relations. So let me assure you that the United States is 
ready to do its part to strengthen world peace by strengthening international 
peace-keeping. 
For decades, the American military has served as a stabilizing presence 
around the globe. And I want to draw on our extensive experience in winning 
wars, in keeping the peace, to support United Nations peace-keeping. I have 
directed the United States Secretary of Defense to place a new emphasis on 
peace-keeping. Because of peace-keeping's growing importance as a mission for 
the United States military, we will emphasize training of combat, engineering 
and logistical units for the full range of peace-keeping and humanitarian 
activities and we will work with the United Nations to best employ our 
considerable lift, logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to 
support peace-keeping operations. And we will offer our capabilities for 
joint simulations and exercises to strengthen our ability to undertake joint 
peace-keeping operations. 

There is room for all countries, large and small, and I hope all will 
play a part. 
Member States, as always, must retain the final decision on the use of 
their troops, of course. But we must develop our ability to coordinate 
peace-keeping efforts so that we can mobilize quickly when a threat to peace 
arises or when people in need look to the world for help. 
I have further directed the establishment of a permanent peace-keeping 
curriculum in United States military schools. Training, plainly, is a key 
element. The United States is prepared to make available our bases and 
facilities for multinational training and field exercises. One such base, 
nearby, with facilities is Fort Dix. America used these bases to win the cold 
war and today, with that war over, they can help build a lasting peace. 
The United States is willing to provide our military expertise to the 
United Nations to help the United Nations strengthen its planning and 
operations for peace-keeping, and we will also broaden American support for 
monitoring, verification, reconnaissance and other requirements of United 
Nations peace-keeping or humanitarian assistance operations. 
And, finally, the United States will review how we fund peace-keeping and 
explore new ways to ensure adequate American financial support for United 
Nations peace-keeping and United Nations humanitarian activities. I do 
believe that we must think differently about how we ensure and pay for our 
security in this new era. 
While the cold war may have ended, the super-Power nuclear arms 
competition, regional competition, weapons of mass destruction continue. Over 
20 countries have, or are developing, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons 
 
and the means to deliver them. At a time when the United States and its 
former adversaries are engaged in deep, historic cuts in our nuclear arsenals, 
our children and grandchildren will never forgive us if we allow new and 
unstable nuclear stand-offs to develop around the world. 

We believe the Security Council should become a key forum for 
non-proliferation enforcement. The Security Council should make clear its 
intention to stem proliferation and sanction proliferators. Reaffirming 
assurances made at the time the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons was negotiated, I propose that the Security Council reassure the 
non-nuclear States that it will seek immediate action to provide assistance, 
in accordance with the Charter, to any any non-nuclear-weapon State party to 
the non-proliferation Treaty that is a victim of an act of aggression or an 
object of threat of aggression involving nuclear weapons. 
I also call for the indefinite renewal of the nuclear non-proliferation 
Treaty when it is reviewed in 1995. I believe we must explore ways we can 
strengthen linkages between the suppliers 'clubs', the nuclear-suppliers 
group, the Australia Group, the missile-technology control regime and United 
Nations specialized agencies. 
Here I would like to note the productive efforts of the United Nations 
Special Commission (UNSCOM) to dismantle the Iraqi weapons-of-mass-destruction 
programme, and the continuing good work of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA). But as the United Nations organizations adapt to stop 
proliferation, so too must every Member State change its structures to advance 
our non-proliferation goals. 
In that spirit I want today to announce my intention to work with the 
United States Congress to redirect the United States Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (ACDA) to refocus its talents on providing technical 
support for non-proliferation, weapons monitoring and destruction, and global 
defence conversion. Under the direction of the Secretary of State, ACDA 

should be used not only in completing the traditional arms-control agenda but, 
just as importantly, in providing technical assistance on our new security 
agenda. 
Even as we work to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
we must be realistic and guard ourselves against proliferation that is already 
taking place. Therefore, we are working towards a cooperative system for 
defence against limited ballistic missile attacks. We fully intend to have 
other nations participate in this global protection system. 
While expanded peace-keeping capabilities and improved non-proliferation 
efforts will be critical for building an enduring peace, shared economic 
growth is the long-term foundation for a brighter future well into the next 
century. That is why I stated yesterday, during a moment of international 
uncertainty, that the United States would be strongly engaged with its global 
partners in building a global economic, financial and trading structure for 
this new era. 
At the same time, I urged that our global responsibilities lead us to 
examine ways to strengthen the Group of Seven (G-7) coordination process, and 
I affirmed America's support for a European integration that opens markets and 
enhances Europe's capability to be our partner in the great challenges that we 
face in this new era. While the exact form of integration is, of course, for 
Europeans to determine, we will stand by them. 
Economic growth is not a zero-sum process. All of us will benefit from 
the expanded trade and investment that comes from a vibrant, growing world 
economy. To ensure that the benefits of this growth are sustained and shared 
by all, fair and open competition should be the fuel for the global economic 

engine. That is why the United States wants to complete the Uruguay Round of 
the negotiations within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) as 
soon as possible, and to create a network of free-trade agreements, beginning 
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. 
At the same time, we need to recognize that we have a shared 
responsibility to foster and support the free-market reforms necessary to 
build growing economies and vibrant democracies in the developing world and in 
the new democratic States. This should be done by promoting the private 
sector to build these new economies, not by fostering dependency with 
traditional Government-to-Government foreign aid. 
After the Second World War, foreign assistance often served as a weapon 
in the cold war. Obviously, we will still use critical foreign-assistance 
funds to meet legitimate security needs. And, as our humanitarian operations 
in Somalia and northern Iraq, Bosnia and the former Soviet Union will testify, 
we will continue our robust humanitarian assistance efforts to help those 
suffering from man-made and natural disasters. 
But foreign aid as we have known it needs to be transformed. The notion 
of the handout to less developed countries needs to give way to cooperation 
and mutually productive economic relationships. We know this: the more a 
nation relies on the private sector and free markets, the higher its rate of 
growth; the more open to trade it is, the higher its rate of growth; and the 
better a country's investment climate, the higher its rate of growth. 
To move from what I would call aid-dependency to economic partnership, we 
propose to alter fundamentally the focus of United States assistance 
programmes to building strong, independent economies that can become 

contributors to a healthy, growing global economy. That means that our new 
emphasis should be on building economic partnerships among our private sectors 
that will promote prosperity at home, and abroad also. Working with our 
Congress I will propose a top-to-bottom overhaul of our institutions that plan 
and administer foreign assistance, drastically reducing the bureaucracy that 
has built up around Government-based programmes, streamlining our delivery 
systems and strengthening support for private-sector development and economic 
reform. 
The Agency for International Development (AID), another institution born 
during the cold war, needs to be fundamentally and radically overhauled. 
Promoting economic security, opportunity and competitiveness will become a 
primary mission of the State Department. Our assistance efforts should not be 
charity. On the contrary, they should promote mutual prosperity. Therefore, 
using existing foreign-affairs resources, I will propose creating a $1 billion 
growth fund. The fund will provide grants and credits to support United 
States businesses in providing expertise, goods and services desperately 
needed in countries undertaking economic restructuring. 
I will also support significantly increasing the programmes of the 
Export-Import Bank to ensure that United States products and technology 
promote investment in world-wide economic growth. 
The United States will work with its global partners, especially the G-7 
nations, to enhance global growth at this key point in world history, as we 
end one era and begin another. 
None of us can afford insular policies. Each of us must contribute, 
through greater coordinated action, to building ¬£ stronger world economy. 

I realize that what I have outlined today is an ambitious agenda. But we 
live in remarkable times: times when empires collapse, ideologies dissolve 
and walls crumble; times when change can come so fast that we sometimes forget 
how far and how fast we have progressed in achieving our hopes for a global 
community of democratic nations. 

And in the face of today's changes, with the loss of so much that was 
familiar and predictable, there is now a great temptation for people 
everywhere to turn inward and to build walls around themselves walls against 
trade, walls against people, walls against ideas and investment, walls against 
anything at all that appears new and different. 
As the Berlin Wall fell, these walls too must fall. They must fall 
because we cannot separate our fate from that of others. Our peace is so 
interconnected, our security so intertwined, our prosperity so interdependent, 
that to turn inward and retreat from the world is to invite disaster and 
defeat. 
At the threshold of a new century we can truly say a more peaceful, more 
secure, more prosperous future beckons to us. For the sake of our children 
and our grandchildren, for the sake of those who perished during the cold war 
and for the sake of every man, woman and child who kept freedom's flame alive 
even during the darkest noon, let us pledge ourselves to make that future 
real, and let us pledge ourselves to fulfil the promise of a truly United 
Nations. 
Thank you and may God bless you all. 
﻿
I would like to offer you my congratulations and profound best wishes, Sir, as you assume your important duties as President of the General Assembly at this session. The wisdom and the understanding you bring to this position are particularly appropriate for these historic times. I am confident that you will do great honour to the legacy left by your predecessor.
A few days hence the leaders of over 80 countries will gather here to discuss the pressing plight of tens of millions of innocent children around the world - the horrors of hunger and disease, the debilitating consequences of illiteracy, the abomination of abuse. The Prime Minister of Canada has the honour to co-chair that World Summit for Children, which will focus our attention as never before on what this Organisation must still do: construct a world order that allows all nations, all peoples, all colours and creeds to live on a planet that is prosperous, peaceful, free and just.
There is an old Indian saying from Western Canada:
'We do not inherit this land from our parents; we simply borrow it from our children.'
That idea motivates the Children Summit, as it must this Organisation. We live in uncommon ties. Never before has the opportunity for this body to exercise its intended mission been greater/ and never before have the risks and challenges been so daunting.	.
This past year has seen the tearing down of old barriers/ the disintegration of walls - walls of the mind and real walls - walls we once thought permanent.
We in the West/ perhaps to an extreme used to view the world through the prism of the cold war. That prism determined many of our priorities and guided our actions. That prism was a prison, and it has now been shattered. The consequence has been liberation. Liberation for millions of people in Central and Eastern Europe who now experience democracy where they only recently dreamt of it. Liberation for the minds of men and women who can now turn to old problems long neglected and new problems now before us. Liberation for the world/ which is now being freed from the tensions of a European balance of terror that penetrated to the farthest corner of the globe. And 1.' aeration for this Organization/ where the words of the United Nations Charter can cease to be distant goals and may now become descriptions of our common action. 
The past year has seen progress in many regions and on many issues.
Namibia, the last colony in Africa, is now its newest democracy. We take great pride of the role that the United Nations played in assisting Namibia to make its transition to independence - a role that was made possible by the international force involving 109 Member of the Organisation.
In South Africa Nelson Mandela is now free, and he and President de Klerk are on the verge of beginning a process of negotiation with a view to building a non-racial, democratic South Africa. We applaud this process and impatiently wait the day when we shall see clear and irreversible changes in the apartheid regime. We call upon all South Africans to show the necessary good will to bring, to end to the violence which is casting a shadow over the negotiation process.
In Cambodia the parties to that long, bloody conflict may be on the path to a peaceful settlement.   All Cambodians welcome the unanimity displayed by the Security Council when it approved last week a framework for a comprehensive political solution to this conflict. Ш hope that this will soon set Cambodia on the road to a just, peaceful and lasting settlement. Canada unequivocally supports that effort and we have already pledged $1.5 million to help the United Nations give effect to its plans.
Elsewhere in Asia the Government of South Korea has in our view taken a welcome initiative in beginning talks with its northern neighbour. We hope that Korea will become a full and active Member of the Organisation.
In Latin America the unique experience and expertise of the United Nations in peace-keeping has been invaluable. The cease-fire in Nicaragua, the successful conclusion of the democratic process there, and progress in the talks in El Salvador and Guatemala may finally bring hope to a region torn too long by conflict and ideology. 
In the Persian Gulf the United Nations is playing the role it has not been able to play for decades. Thanks to the Organisation, the international community has been able to bring its authority to bear on a country which has grossly and clearly contravened the United Nations Charter's prohibition on policies of aggression and has thereby endangered the serious efforts of all the Members of the United Nations to settle disputes peacefully.
The Security Council's ability to act in concert is without any doubt testimony to the new era of co-operation now opening to us. But it is also a warning to Iraq that the United Nations will not relent until Iraq has withdrawn its forces from Kuwait and restored independence to that small country.
We obviously need more than resolutions. All the Members of the United Nations - each in its own way - should ensure the effectiveness of the measures adopted so far and should use whatever diplomatic resources are available to them to persuade Iraq to withdraw its troops. Iraq's aggression is a litmus test for what the United Nations can now become. It we succeed here the United Nations will send a clear and unambiguous signal to others that the world is now different, that it will not tolerate aggression and that international law is to be served and not ignored.
Now is not a time for complacency. That we are succeeding in some parts of the world means we have yet to succeed in others. That we have solved some problems means there are many still to solve.
In Lebanon a grave situation continues, and, while we take heart from constitutional progress made in the past year, all members of the international community, collectively and individually - must make efforts to restore Lebanon's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
In the Middle East, although the world is focused on the Gulf, the continuing Arab-Israeli and Palestinian-Israeli disputes are unresolved and threatening. A just and lasting negotiated solution based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their right to self-determination, is more vital now than ever before.
In the Western Sahara some progress has been made through the great efforts of the Secretary-General to encourage dialogue directed to peace. The real difficulties persist and a settlement has yet to be reached»
And in the Horn of Africa the cycle of conflict, poverty and starvation continues. While we can take pride in the way the United Nations and its agencies provided food to those in need, only a lasting political solution will end the terrible curse of famine in that region.
Around the world the challenge is all too clear: unequal levels of development which perpetuate poverty and spawn conflict; a world population which will expand by 3.5 billion people over the next three and a half decades; 14 million children dying each year from illness and hunger; a generation debilitated by drugs; the proliferation of weapons - chemical, nuclear and conventional; and an ailing environment, whose air is being poisoned, whose oceans and lakes are becoming cesspools, and whose forests are being destroyed as if they were disposable. This is not the picture of a planet of promise: it is the picture of a planet in pain.
My own country, Canada, is a place blessed by Providence. We are prosperous. We are free. We are at peace. But we too have had to confront the need for new attitudes and new approaches to our own problems, including the situation of our aboriginal people. 
Although we failed this year in finding a new constitutional accommodation for our country, I can promise the Assembly that Canada will succeed in renewing our Confederation. We shall do so with that same flexibility, imagination, tolerance and compromise which have made Canada; a nation of so many cultures, into what Barbara Nard once called 'the first international country'.
I have raised those values because they are precisely the ones that speak of the needs of this Organisation and this world. In this new era compromise must cease to be seen as second best; it must become the instrument of our common cause.
In the years between the two world wars and in the depths of the cold war, there were debates about whether a State's interests were best pursued through unilateral action or through co-operation and compromise. That debate is now over. It is over not because one side won but because the world has changed. The choice today is not between realism and idealism, unilateralism or co-operation; it is between success and failure. Co-operation is now the new realism and pragmatism is the only path to progress. We either work together and succeed, or we work separately and fail. We need new action. But we also need new attitudes - ideas that animate, ideas that indicate what is no longer feasible and what is now necessary.
I believe our first challenge is to redefine the concept of security. Security has ceased to be something to be achieved unilaterally. Security has ceased to be something to be attained through military means alone. Security has become multidimensional and it has become co-operative. In a world where poverty and underdevelopment plague most of the planet, the developed world cannot pretend to be secure simply because it alone is prosperous. In an era of nuclear and chemical weapons, of ballistic missiles, of terrorism, of interdependent markets and economies, of diseases, the development of prosperity throughout the world; is not a question o£ charity but a question of security. That mandates continued emphasis on official development assistance, on more open and free markets, on innovative debt strategies. These are not only economic or humanitarian actions; they have become security imperatives.
In a world where the frontiers of States may be secure but the air, land and water are being poisoned, environmental action is also a fundamental security question. And in a period of burgeoning population and rapid industrialisation, where winds and waters know no borders, environmental security will be only achieved through co-operation. 
That mandates an approach to the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development that is aggressive and innovative. It requires a realistic dialogue between the developing and the developed world about environmental damage that threatens all States, rich and poor. As part of that effort» Canada will vigorously pursue the possibility of a world forestry convention by 1992.
A now concept of security also requires that we address »ore effectively the political and Military tensions that persist in so many regions of the world. While there is such to be done globally, I believe that a new focus on regional approaches to security is more necessary and more promising than ever. It is more necessary both because of the consequences of conflict arising from interdependence and because of the destructive nature of modern weapons. And it is more promising because the absence of East-West tensions now frees countries and regions to pursue solutions to local problems on local terms.
Security is more than the absence of war; it is the presence of peace. That requires a shared sense on each side that the survival of the other is in its own best interest. That means building trust and confidence. Canada believes that a regional approach to confidence building has much to offer. That approach can involve a variety of measures dialogue itself designed to exchange perspectives and increase understanding; greater transparency in terms of military capacity; agreements to inform other members in the region of activities they night consider threatening in the absence of warning; and eventually institutions and processes of conflict resolution and crisis prevention.
Confidence building is not a blueprint or a grand solution. It does not prejudge outcomes or impose solutions. It is not rigid. It is in fact what the Organisation has always done best. It is step-by-step. It is functional. It is flexible. 
The success of such an approach in Europe is undeniable. Obviously, specific measures taken in Europe nay not apply to other regions. Those regions will require approaches tailored to their nature and requirements. But the fundamental principles of confidence building apply.
It is for that reason that, in addition to proposing new initiatives for the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, Canada has suggested that the countries of the North-Pacific region could benefit from similar approaches to confidence building. Those might include advance notification of military manoeuvres, an Open Skies regime, and military data exchanges. Other regions of the world - the Middle East, Latin America - might also benefit from a regional approach to confidence building.
One of the key elements of confidence building is verification. Verification provides proof, and proof triggers trust. That is why Canada co-sponsored the resolution adopted by the General Assembly calling for an experts' study on verification to be conducted by the Secretary-General - resolution 43/81 B. A Canadian chaired that study and we will take the lead at this session of the Assembly in proposing a resolution that will call on the United Nations to promote increased dialogue between diplomats and experts on verification issues; to establish a United Nations data bank of verification research material; and to support and expand where appropriate the powers of the Secretary-General to engage in fact-finding missions as they relate to the possible violation of existing arms-control agreements.
There is one persistent security problem above all others that the international community has failed to address satisfactorily. That is the problem of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and proliferation of their means of delivery, as well as conventional weapons, which have become so destructive. 
We all recognize that arms do not cause conflicts. But we must also recognise that arms can make conflict more likely and that they make that conflict more destructive when it occurs. The progress between the super-Powers on the reduction of their stockpiles of nuclear weapons is welcome, as is the progress made to date in ensuring a successful conclusion to the conventional-force-reduction talks currently under way in Vienna. Those negotiations can- and must succeed. But to reduce capabilities and enhance confidence in one region and with some weapons is only part of the challenge. There is much more to be done.
In the area of nuclear proliferation, the just-concluded Review Conference of the Non-proliferation Treaty, despite consensus on almost all issues, was unable to agree on a concluding document, that failure should alert us all to the dangerous prospect of the unravelling of that vital international Treaty. Canada believes that movement is needed on all sides. We welcome the joint American and Soviet commitment to a step-by-step approach to further restrictions on nuclear testing. We believe that commitment should be followed up immediately, with the final goal being a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing.
At the same time, we have been deeply disturbed by a tendency among some others to adopt positions that can only act to undermine the vital consensus which underlies the existing treaties on non-proliferation and nuclear testing. Clearly, compromise and forward movement are required on the part of everyone. But the pursuit of other objectives should not be allowed to threaten those existing agreements that have become so vital. It is Canada's firm view that both the non-proliferation Treaty and a comprehensive test-ban treaty are too important for international peace and security to be held hostage one to the other.
Regional nuclear arms and the threat of chemical proliferation and use have been raised starkly again by the situation in the Persian Gulf. We must move quickly to a comprehensive and global ban on chemical weapons. We urge all parties at the Conference on Disarmament to ensure that the opportunity for a successful agreement is not lost and that agreement is reached soon. During this session of the Assembly, Canada, along with Poland, will seek to strengthen the commitment of all members to that end.
In addition, there is the very important issue of arms transfers and the arms trade. It is critical that peace in Europe not he purchased at the price of a more innovative arras bazaar elsewhere. That arras bazaar has stunted development by hijacking scarce resources. It has distorted whole economies. It has increased bloodshed. It is important in that context that all parties to the conventional-force-reduction talks in Europe take steps to ensure that weapons affected by that agreement not end up as contributions to potential conflicts elsewhere in the world.
The continued proliferation of ballistic-missile technology is particularly worrisome. Ballistic missiles raise the prospect of the delivery of weapons of mass destruction into the heart of enemy territory. That possibility not only means great potential suffering; it also induces regional arms races. That is why Canada has so strongly supported the recent expansion of the membership of the Missile Technology Control Regime. The Assembly should focus on that issue and call for all Members to take measures to control the export of that technology. Canada will play a leading role in such an effort.
Canada also believes that is important to make arms transfers and procurement as transparent as is prudent and practical. Transparency builds confidence and is recognition of the obligation we all have to the common interest. That is why Canada has strongly supported the work of the United Nations Group of Government Experts on Arms Transfer Transparency and why we look forward to studying its report in detail. That is why we support the widest possible voluntary reporting to the United Nations of military expenditures, procurement and arms transfers. I am pleased to announce that, this year for the first time, Canada will be releasing an annual report on its exports of military goods.
There is, with arms, a demand side and a supply side. Measures can be taken to restrict supplies to stabilising and prudent levels. But demand must also be addressed, and that is why a regional approach to confidence building is relevant to the issue too.
Finally, Canada believes that much more can be done to ensure that the United Nations unique capacity to provide peace-keeping forces for regional conflicts remains effective and efficient. Ï am pleased that Canada was able to help breathe new life into the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations, which has now provided the United Nations with new proposals to improve present peace-keeping activities and to plan for new ventures. However, more work and even greater commitment will be needed to ensure that the United Nations is provided with the capacity and the resources to mount varied, speedy and successful peace-keeping operations, be they in Cambodia, Central America, the Western Sahara or the Persian Gulf.
In particular, Canada would support a United Nations effort to secure a clear indication from all Member States of the forces and equipment they could make available in future United Nations peace-keeping operations. We believe that effort could include an inventory of civilian resources. That might include police forces, communications and logistics personnel and elections experts and observers, who could be utilized not only to keep the peace but to prepare for peace. If there is one thing that recent events make clear, it is that democracy and freedom are fundamental factors in building a co-operative security structure for our new era. In Central and Eastern Europe, Latin America, Asia and parts of Africa, there is a new recognition that democracy is necessary because democracy works. That is not the victory of one ideology over another. It is the victory of common sense. 
Democracy allows Governments to gauge and reflect the needs of their societies. Democracy allows individuals to express their views and exercise their abilities. Democracy and development go hand in hand, since it is the open market which feeds prosperity and leads, almost always, to democracy.
Democracy limits the conflict which inevitably results from repression. Democracy is flexible, and because it is flexible it does not snap. Democracy, at bottom, is the politics of pragmatism and the politics of security.
It is our belief in the role of democracy in building security that has led Canada to propose a democratic development unit for the Organization of American States. That proposal has been accepted. It is that same belief that has led Canada to put forward human rights proposals in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe which will strengthen the rule of law and the rights of minorities throughout Europe, It is the same belief that has led Canada to contribute, bilaterally and through the Commonwealth, to democratic dialogue and preparations for constitutional talks in South Africa.
That is also why Canada applauds the July decision of the Organisation of African Unity to endorse a new charter dealing with democracy and development and why we supported financially the conference which produced it. And that is why we provided election assistance this year to Haiti, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Namibia and Nicaragua.
Canada believes that there is a further role for this Organisation in encouraging democratic development. Through supporting the co-operation of the various regional organizations in exchanging information and improving co-ordination, and through encouraging Member States in their many recent efforts to strengthen democracy, the General Assembly can act as a catalyst in reinforcing both democracy and security. 
As we move forward, I believe there are several guidelines we can usefully adopt as we seek together to build a structure of co-operative security.
Guideline 1 is that co-operative security is multidimensional. It is based on the recognition that there are many significant threats to our livelihood, our health, our development and our very existence.
Guideline 2 is that co-operative security accepts that links exist between threats. It recognizes that few threats can be managed satisfactorily without also addressing others, that peace requires prosperity, that stability requires justice within and between States, that democracy, development and disarmament are all related.
Guideline 3 is that co-operative security is functional. It seeks to avoid blueprints and grand schemes and focuses on institutions and approaches which work, which produce results.
Guideline 4 is that co-operative security requires dialogue and compromise. It accepts the fundamental truth that conversation is almost always better than conflict and that conversation leading to compromise is the best way to solve problems.
Guideline 5 is that co-operative security builds on the link between stability and change. It demands that we accept that order and predictability are not an alternative to change, but rather its foundation, and that order in turn requires growth and flexibility if it is to endure.
Guideline 6 is that co-operative security rejects blocs. Blocs perpetuate distrust. They build a tension between regions and groups which is no better than tension between States. They perpetuate a 'them versus us' psychology which may satisfy sentiment but which does little to solve problems. 
Guideline 7 is that co-operative security rejects stale rhetoric and sterile ideology. It sees no advantage in stereotypes and sees much damage in the prejudice perpetuated by them. It rejects - as Canada, for example, does - such blemishes on this Organisation as the odious resolution equating Zionism with racism adopted 15 years ago by the Assembly.
Guideline 8 is that co-operative security recognizes that true security is impossible without justice. It accepts that democracy within States is a force for stability and prosperity and that justice between States/ whether through development assistance/ debt relief or fairer and more open terms of trade, is a necessary component of a secure world.
Today in Ottawa on our Parliament Hill a statue was unveiled to Lester B. Pearson; a great Canadian leader and world statesman, a true friend of this Organization. Mr. Pearson was present at the creation of the United Nations. We helped build its Charter. We helped mould its mission. We played a central role in establishing the Organization's great tradition of peace-keeping. There was no cause to which he was more committed than the construction of an effective United Nations system. Out of the ashes of the Second World War and the First World War before it he sought to build a structure of co-operative security which would prevent Armageddon and build a world which was prosperous/ free and just for all. Lester Pearson never saw the United Nations fulfil its intended purpose. His dream was dashed by yet another war, the cold war.
That war is now over. The promise is renewed/ and the dream rekindled. Yet the challenges remain more acute/ more demanding than ever before. Let us do now what we have been unable to do before. Let us shake off our past failings/ confront our present and in so doing build a new future. Let us behave as United Nations. 
﻿
It is really a great privilege to greet you today as we begin what marks a new and historic session of the General Assembly. My congratulations to the Honourable Guido de Marco on his election to the presidency of the General Assembly. On a personal note I want to say that, having witnessed the unprecedented unity and co-operation of the past two months, I have never been prouder to have once served within your ranks and never been prouder that the United States is the host country for the United Nations.
Forty-five years ago, while the fires of an epic war still raged across two oceans and two continents, a small group of men and women began a search for hope amid the ruins and they gathered in San Francisco, stepping back from the haze and horror to try to shape a new structure that might support an ancient dream.
Intensely idealistic, and yet tempered by war, they sought to build a new kind of bridge, a bridge between nations, a bridge that might help carry humankind from its darkest hour to its brightest day.
The founding of the United Nations embodied our deepest hopes for a peaceful world. And during the past year we have come closer than ever before to realizing those hopes. We have seen a century sundered by barbed threats and barbed wire give way to a new era of peace and competition and freedom. 
The revolution of 1989 swept the world almost with a life of its own, carried by a new breeze of freedom that transformed the political climate from Central Europe to Central America, and touched almost every corner of the globe. That breeze has been sustained by a now almost-universal recognition of a simple, fundamental truth: the human spirit cannot be locked up forever. The truth is that people everywhere are motivated in much the same way and people everywhere want much the same thing: the chance to live a life of purpose, the chance to choose s life in which they and their children can learn and grow healthy, worship freely, and prosper through the work of their hands and their hearts and their minds. We are not talking about the power of nations, but the power of individuals: the power to choose, the power to risk, the power to succeed.
This is a new and different world. Not since 1945 have we seen the real possibility of using the United Nations as it was designed - as a centre for international collective security.
The changes in the Soviet Union have been critical to the emergence of a stronger United Nations. The United States-Soviet relationship is finally beyond containment and confrontation, and now we seek to fulfil the promise of mutually shared understanding.
The long twilight struggle that for 45 years has divided Europe, our two nations and much of the world has come to an end. Much has changed over the last two years. The Soviet Union has taken many dramatic and important steps to participate fully in the community of nations, and when the Soviet Union agreed with so many of us here in the United Nations to condemn the aggression of Iraq, there could be no doubt that we had indeed put four decades of history behind us. 
We are hopeful that the machinery of the United Nations will no longer he frozen by the divisions that plagued us during the cold war; that at long last we can build new bridges and tear down old walls; that at long last we will be able to build a new world based on an event for which we have all hoped - an end to the cold war.
Two days from now the world will be watching when the cold war is formally buried in Berlin. And in this time of testing a fundamental question must be asked a question not for any one nation, but for the United Nations. And the question is this: Can we work together in a new partnership of nations? Can the collective strength of the world community, expressed by the United Nations, unite to deter and defeat aggression? Because the cold war's battle of ideas is not the last epic battle of this century. 
Two months ago, in the waning weeks of one of history's most hopeful summers, the vast, still beauty of the peaceful Kuwaiti desert was fouled by the stench of diesel and the roar of steel tanks. Once again the sound of distant thunder echoed across a cloudless sky. And once again the world awoke to face the guns of August.
But this time the world was ready. The United Nations Security Council's resolute response to Iraq's unprovoked aggression has been without precedent. Since the invasion on 2 August the Council has adopted eight major resolutions setting the terms for a solution to the crisis.
The Iraqi regime has yet to face the facts. But as I said last month: The annexation of Kuwait will not be permitted to stand. This is not simply the view of the United States. It is the view of every Kuwaiti, the Arab League and the United Nations. Iraq's leaders should listen: it is Iraq against the world. Let me take this opportunity to make the policy of my Government clear. The United States supports the use of sanctions to compel Iraq's leaders to withdraw immediately and without condition from Kuwait. We also support the provision of medicine and food for humanitarian purposes, so long as distribution can be properly monitored. Our quarrel is not with the people of Iraq. We do not wish for them to suffer. The world's quarrel is with the dictator who ordered that invasion.
Along with others, we have dispatched military forces to the region to enforce sanctions, to deter and if need be defend against further aggression. We seek no advantage for ourselves. Nor do we seek to maintain our military forces in Saudi Arabia for one day longer than is necessary. The United States forces were sent at the request of the Saudi Government. The American people - and this President - want every single American soldier brought home as soon as this mission is completed. 
Let me also emphasise that all of us here at the United Nations hope that military force will never be used. We seek a peaceful outcome - a diplomatic outcome. And one more thing - in the aftermath of Iraq's unconditional departure from Kuwait, I truly believe there may be opportunities: for Iraq and Kuwait to settle their differences permanently; for the States of the Gulf themselves to build new arrangements for stability; and for all the States and peoples of the region to settle the conflict that divides the Arabs from Israel. But the world's key task - now, first and always - must be to demonstrate that aggression will not be tolerated or rewarded.
Through the United Nations Security Council, Iraq has been judged - fairly judged - by a jury of its peers, the very nations of the Earth. Today the regime stands isolated and out of step with the times, separated from the civilized world not by space but by centuries. Iraq's unprovoked aggression is a throw-back to another era, a dark relic from a dark time. It has plundered Kuwait; it has terrorised innocent civilians; it has held even diplomats hostage. Iraq and its leaders must be held liable for these crimes of abuse and destruction. But this outrageous disregard for basic human rights does not come as a total surprise. Thousands of Iraqis have been executed on political and religious grounds, and even more through a genocidal, poison-gas war waged against Iraq's own Kurdish villagers.
As a world community, we must act - not only to deter the use of inhumane weapons like mustard and nerve gas, but to eliminate the weapons entirely. That is why one year ago I came to the General Assembly with new proposals to banish these terrible weapons from the face of the Earth. I promised that the United States would destroy over 88 per cent of its stockpile in the first eight years of a chemical weapons ban treaty, and 100 per cent - all of them - in 10 years, if all nations with chemical weapons capabilities signed the treaty. 
We have stood by those promises. In June the United States and the Soviet Union signed a landmark agreement to halt production and destroy the vast majority of our stockpiles. Today United States chemical weapons are being destroyed.
But time is running out. This is not merely a bilateral concern. The Gulf crisis proves how important it is to act together - and to act now - to conclude an absolute, world-wide ban on these weapons. We must also redouble our efforts to stem the spread of nuclear weapons, biological weapons and the ballistic missiles that can rain destruction upon distant peoples.
The United Nations can help bring about a new day, a day when these kinds of terrible weapons and the terrible despots who would use them are both a thing o£ the past. It is in our hands to leave these dark machines behind, in the dark ages where they belong, and to press forward to cap a historic movement towards a new world order and a long era of peace.
We have a vision of a new partnership of nations that transcends the cold war - a partnership based on consultation, co-operation and collective action, especially through international and regional organizations; a partnership united by principle and the rule of law, and supported by an equitable sharing of both cost and commitment; a partnership whose goals are to increase democracy, increase prosperity, increase the peace, and reduce arms.
And as we look to the future the calendar offers up a convenient milestone, a signpost by which to measure our progress as a community of nations. The year 2000 marks a turning-point, beginning not only the turn of the decade, not only the turn of the century, but also the turn of the millennium. And 10 years from now, as the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly begins, you will again find many of us in this Hall, our hair a bit more grey, perhaps, and a little less spring in our walk. But you will not find us with any less hope or idealism, or any less confidence in the ultimate triumph of mankind. I see a world of open borders, open trade, and - most importantly - open minds; a world that celebrates the common heritage that belongs to all the world9s people, taking pride not just in hometown or homeland, but in humanity itself. I see a world touched by a spirit like that of the Olympics: based not on competition that is driven by fear, but sought out of joy and exhilaration and a true quest for excellence. 
I see a world where democracy continues to win new friends and convert old foes, and where the Americas, North, Central and South, can provide a model for the future of all humankind - the world's first completely democratic hemisphere.
And I see a world building on the emerging new model of European unity; not just Europe, but the whole world - whole and free. This is precisely why the present aggression in the Gulf is a menace not only to one region's security but to the entire world's vision of our future. It threatens to turn the dream of a new international order into a grim nightmare of anarchy, in which the law of the jungle supplants the law of nations.
That is why the United Nations reacted with such historic unity and resolve. And that is why this challenge is a test that we cannot afford to fail. I am confident that we will prevail. Success, too, will have lasting consequences - reinforcing civilized standards of international conduct, setting a new precedent in international co-operation, brightening the prospects for our vision of the future.
There are 10 more years until the century is out - 10 more years to put the struggles of the twentieth century permanently behind us; 10 more years to help to launch a new partnership of nations. Throughout those 10 years - and beginning now - the United Nations has a new and vital role in building towards that partnership. Last year's session of the General Assembly showed how we can make greater progress towards a more pragmatic and successful United Nations. And, for the first time, the Security Council is beginning to work as it was designed to work.
Now is the time to set aside old and counter-productive debates, procedures, controversies and resolutions. It is time to replace polemic attacks with pragmatic action. 
We have shown that the United Nations can count on the collective strength of the international community. We have shown that the United Nations can rise to the challenge of aggression, just as its founders hoped it would. How, in this time of testing, we must also show that the United Nations is the place to build international support and consensus for meeting the other challenges that we face.
The world remains a dangerous place. Our security and well-being often depend, in part, on events occurring far away. We need serious international co-operative efforts to make headway on threats to the environment, on terrorism, on management of the debt burden, on the fight against the scourge of international drug trafficking, and on refugees and peace-keeping efforts around the world.
But the world also remains a hopeful place. Calls for democracy and human rights are being reborn everywhere. These calls are an expression of support for the values enshrined in the United Nations Charter. They encourage our hopes for a more stable, more peaceful, more prosperous world.
Free elections are the foundation of democratic government, and can produce dramatic successes, as we have seen in Namibia and Nicaragua. The time has come to structure the role of the United Nations in such efforts more formally. So, today, I propose that the United Nations establish a special co-ordinator for electoral assistance, to be assisted by a United Nations electoral commission comprising distinguished experts from around the world.
As with free elections, we believe that universal United Nations membership - membership for all States - is central to the future of the Organization and to the new partnership that we have discussed. In support of this principle, and in conjunction with United Nations efforts to reduce regional tensions, the United States fully supports United Nations membership for the Republic of Korea. We do so without prejudice to the ultimate objective of reunification of the Korean Peninsula, and without opposition to simultaneous membership for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Building on these and other initiatives, we must join together in a new compact - all of us - to bring the United Nations into the twenty-first century. I call today for a major, long-term effort to do this. We should build on the success, the admirable success, of our distinguished Secretary-General - my long-time friend and colleague, and yours - Javier Perez de Cuellar. We should strive to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations.
The United States is committed to playing its part - helping to maintain global security, promoting democracy and prosperity. My Administration is fully committed to supporting the United Nations, and to paying what we are obliged to pay by our commitment to the Charter. International peace and security - and international freedom and prosperity - require no less. 
The world must know and understand that from this hour, from this day, from this Hall, we step forth with a new sense of purpose, a new sense of possibilities. We are united, prepared to swim upstream, to march uphill, to tackle the tough challenges as they come - not only as the United Nations, but as the nations of the world united.
Let it be said of the final decade of the twentieth century that this was a time when humankind came into its own, when we emerged from the grit and the smoke of the industrial age to bring about a revolution of the spirit and of the mind, and began a journey into a new day, a new age, and a new partnership of nations.
The United Nations is now fulfilling its promise as the world's parliament of peace. I congratulate you, I support you, and I wish you Godspeed in the challenges ahead. 
﻿1.	Mr. President, I begin by expressing Canada's congratulations to you on your election to the presidency. As a representative of Ecuador you have played an active role in the affairs of Latin America and in many areas of world co-operation. We welcome your election and wish you well in carrying out the high duties of leadership of the twenty-eighth session.
2.	By the admission of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, the United Nations has taken another big step towards universality. Canada applauds the breadth of mind-the evolution from stalemate in Europe — that has made these States welcome within our Organization.
3.	Canada also warmly welcomes the admission of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas as a full Member. As a country that has long enjoyed close links with the Bahamas, we are confident that the influence of our newest Member will be directed to the highest interests of the United Nations.
4.	The United Nations is becoming universal-is it becoming more effective as an instrument for the attainment of the hopes and aspirations of mankind?
5.	Since last we met here one of the architects of this Organization, the Right Honourable Lester B. Pearson, died in Canada. In those bright, hopeful days when he and others were engaged in preparing for the birth of the United Nations, Mr. Pearson expressed his fear that when the unifying pressures of world war have subsided, 'nationalist pride and prejudice would become strong again-and the narrow concept of the national interest prevail'. This judgement on the future was all too quickly proven accurate. Yet as conscious of its imperfections as any man, Mr. Pearson remained convinced that the United Nations was indispensable for even the most slow and painful march away from mass violence and poverty.
6.	It is true that in certain key areas of world security, the United Nations appears to have been bypassed. Improved relations between the great Powers have been achieved essentially through bilateral efforts. Significant steps have been taken towards greater European stability with the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and talks of mutual balanced force reductions. The agreement reached bilaterally between India and Pakistan, restoring the conditions of peace and future co-operation in the subcontinent, has been warmly welcomed by the world community.
7.	All of us are, in some degree, affected by these deliberations and decisions, and we recognize that it is the nature of our world's society that all of us do not have the opportunity to contribute to the decision-making as we would wish through this world forum. As the Secretary- General has said in the excellent introduction to his annual report:
'It is necessary to emphasize that there is no inevitable clash between bilateral and multilateral diplomacy. They are, or should be, mutually supporting, each having particular advantages in particular situations. There is no single road to peace- we have to try all roads.
But we should never fail to assert the interest and the primacy of this Organization where it has an indispensable role to play.
8.	Such was Canada's view at the International Conference on Viet-Nam held early this year in Paris. At that Conference I attempted to have the United Nations and the United Nations Secretary-General firmly integrated into the peace observation machinery which was being established at that Conference. These efforts failed.
9.	After five months of efforts to play the role of an impartial international observer, we withdrew from the International Commission of Control and Supervision in Viet-Nam, frustrated, but by no means embittered.
10.	Canada remains prepared to play its part in peacekeeping and peace observation. But we have learned a lesson from our long and frustrating attempts to have these peace-keeping bodies operate objectively. The lesson is this: peace-keeping and peace observation operations stand the best chance of success if they are conducted under the authority of the United Nations Security Council.
11.	We have long assumed that progress in technology, agriculture and communications would mean progress for the underprivileged-a ladder on which people could climb away from hunger, disease and degradation. Yet tragically the word 'progress' has come to mock us. The gap between rich and poor is wider than ever. Material achievements are threatened by spiralling world inflation, increasing pollution, unforeseen commodity shortages and by the capricious movements of world finance.
12.	For ill as well as for good, we are increasingly interdependent however jealously we guard our independence. No nation can solve inflation in isolation from the others. No nation can assure the cleanness of air or the purity of water that flow freely across political boundaries. Faced individually by each sovereign State, the challenges are insurmountable. For they are universal problems and they can only be met effectively by universal solutions. The United Nations and its agencies are the only bodies with the authority and with the breadth of representation to meet these challenges.
13.	Even collectively these challenges are intimidating. Our experience with the problem of international security - not least, the problem of the Middle East - has taught us that they will not be overcome by conferences alone, by resolutions or by formal votes. They require a profound and clear-headed appreciation of the dimensions of the problems matched by a common will to work co-operatively towards solutions.
14.	In the opinion of the Canadian Government, we must try to avoid barren and abrasive confrontations, which are frequently the result of formal voting processes. Consensus is another and often surer route; it is the technique we are using increasingly at our Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The results are not dramatic, but they are none the less real. Consensus does not mean the imposition of the will of the majority on a reluctant minority which feels its vital interests arc at issue; it means the shared recognition of what should and can be done. I believe we attach far too much importance to the voting scores. Votes are little solace to the hungry.
15.	There have been three successive years of drought in parts of Africa and the Asian subcontinent and of abnormally poor growing seasons in many other parts of the world. Until now only a few food-producing nations, including Canada, held surplus food stocks, and even these existing stocks fluctuated according to weather conditions and international demand. Over the years, efforts to create food banks have proved largely unsuccessful.
16.	Now a constructive proposal to ensure world food security has been introduced by the Director General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO].  Its rate of success will be directly proportional to the effort made by each nation to adjust accordingly its food production and stocking policies. I urge every nation-not just those which are the traditional producers of surplus food-to support and co-operate with the FAO in this task. I am sure we have all noted with great interest the proposal made yesterday by the Secretary of State of the United States to convene a world food conference in 1974 [2174th meeting]. We in Canada look forward to discussing this proposal in detail, as it must be our aim to exorcize the dreadful spectre of starvation that menaces millions of human beings.
17.	Canada has supported the revitalization which, over the past few years, has been' transforming the Economic and Social Council. A very important change for Canada and for Canada's relations with Europe was our election by the Council to full membership on the Economic Commission for Europe. One of the Council's prime responsibilities is the successful implementation of the action programme adopted by this Assembly for the Second United Nations Development Decade-the International Development Strategy [resolution 2626 (XXV)]. That Strategy is neither perfect nor immutable. Our appraisal of it has already proven to be a difficult process. It is not, however, an impossible process, and it is one that I hope will become easier as we all become more attuned to its requirements.
18.	We stand in the shadow of other terrifying and universal problems, which can be overcome only by international co-operation. Last Year I spoke out strongly about terrorism and I must do so again. Civilization cries out for effective action by the international community to protect innocent persons against premeditated acts of violence.
19.	Since last year international efforts to combat terrorism have gathered some momentum through various international organizations and instrumentalities. Over 86 States have, for example, signed the 1970 Hague Convention on aerial hijacking.  It is encouraging to note the growing list of ratifications of this Convention to combat acts of unlawful interference with civil aviation by States from all the geographical regions and of all political views.
However, terrorism has not been eliminated; it remains a double-edged sword. In its indiscriminate sweep it cuts at the roots of international order, as well as at the hand that wields it. We shall look to all nations and to the General Assembly for action on further measures to combat acts of terrorism.
20.	And terror has another face: it is that of nuclear poison and the ultimate threat of nuclear holocaust. Although 10 years have elapsed since the partial test-ban Treaty  came into force, there has been no further progress towards achieving the cessation of all nuclear tests-which was the ultimate objective of the signatories of that Treaty. Despite improving prospects for international security resulting from strategic arms limitation agreements, there has, regrettably, been no sign that either of the superpowers is prepared to curtail underground nuclear testing or to enter into active negotiations towards the achievement of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. Nor have two great Powers brought to an end nuclear testing in the atmosphere, despite the overwhelming weight of world public opinion.
21.	The global dimension is clear and striking in the use we make of the oceans. Coastal States must protect their economic and environmental interests. On the other hand, there must be certain traditional freedoms on the oceans to facilitate world-wide exchanges. We continue to believe that these elements of the law of the sea are not irreconcilable and that a proper balance can and must be achieved. Canada believes that these rights, which are essential to the well-being of developing and developed coastal States alike, can be exercised in a manner that will take into account the rights of other legitimate users of the sea — in other words, mankind as a whole. A new international order recognizing both the fundamental rights and the responsibilities of States in respect of the oceans can emerge, and we hope will emerge, from the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, if the Governments here assembled have the will.
22.	Similarly, outer space offers exciting prospects of benefit in meeting terrestrial needs in resource management, communications and education. These prospects can be realized for all our peoples only by searching for new and imaginative forms of international co-operation; and I believe that through the United Nations we are well embarked on this search.
23.	Last year the General Assembly accepted the Canadian offer to be host to a conference on the urgent and vital question of human settlements [resolution 3003 (XXVII)]: the United Nations Conference- Exposition on Human Settlements is now scheduled for Vancouver in 1976. We were delighted that the General Assembly responded so warmly to this offer and we are encouraged by the co-operation and enthusiasm which have been displayed during the initial planning stages for the conference.
24.	This year we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Yet in parts of southern Africa minority regimes, still deny man's basic rights through stubborn opposition to his Efforts to achieve equality. Canada recognizes the legitimacy of the struggle to win full human rights and self-determination in southern Africa and is studying ways to broaden its humanitarian support for those engaged in these efforts. The most effective way to mark this twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration will be for each nation to redouble its concern to extend human rights to all its people. But concern must be expressed through achievement.
25.	Mankind's occupation of this planet has been neither wise or far-sighted. Because of our greed, our indifference and our ignorance, we are speeding on a fatal collision course with our environment. The exploitation of our natural resources has been incessant, uncaring and exhaustive. Our air and our waters are becoming foul and poisonous. We seem to be incapable of feeding and clothing adequately our growing millions. So far, we have been unable to live peacefully together or to share our bounty so that all may live a life of dignity.
26.	Although there is no doubt that in some circumstances the agencies of the United Nations can and do move swiftly, on the whole no one can accuse this Organization of approaching its problems with unseemly haste. Too many items have taken up permanent annual residence on the agenda. Still, some progress is being made. The increasing universality of the United Nations, as I remarked at the beginning of this statement, is an outstanding example.
27.	But it seems to me that there is lacking a sense of urgency-a collective sense of urgency about the towering problems confronting mankind and this Organization. In our race with poverty and starvation, terrorism and armaments, pollution and bigotry, we are too apt to forget that time is not on our side.






﻿35.	I should like to add my congratulations to those so well expressed by the Minister for External Relations of Brazil to our new President, Ambassador Benites of Ecuador, whose long experience at the United Nations and his many contributions to international law and to the inter-American system all ensure that this twenty-eighth session of the Assembly will have outstanding leadership.
36.	I come before you today  —  confirmed in office but two days ago  —  as probably the world's most junior Foreign Minister. That President Nixon should ask me as my first official act to speak here for the United States reaffirms the importance that my country attaches to the values and the ideals of the United Nations.
37.	It would be idle to deny that the American people, like many others, have sometimes been disappointed because this Organization has not been more successful in translating its architects' hopes for universal peace into concrete accomplishments.
38.	But, despite our disappointments, my country remains committed to the goal of a world community. We will continue to work in this Parliament of Man to make it a reality.
39.	Two centuries ago, the philosopher Kant predicted that perpetual peace would come eventually — either as the creation of man's moral aspirations or as the consequence of physical necessity. What seemed Utopian then looms as tomorrow's reality; soon there will be no alternative. Our only choice is whether the world envisaged in the Charter will come about as the result of our vision or of a catastrophe invited by our short-sightedness.
40.	The United States has made its choice. My country seeks true peace, not simply an armistice. We strive for a world in which the rule of law governs and fundamental human rights are the birthright of all. Beyond the bilateral diplomacy, the pragmatic agreements and dramatic steps of recent years, we envisage a comprehensive, institutionalized peace encompassing all nations, large and small, a peace which this Organization is uniquely situated to foster and to anchor in the hearts of men. This will be the spirit of American foreign policy. This attitude will guide our work in this Organization.
41.	We start from a bedrock of solid progress. Many of the crises that haunted past sessions of the General Assembly have been put behind us. Agreement has been reached on Berlin; there is a cease-fire in the Middle East; the VietNam war has been ended. The rigid confrontation that has dominated international life and weakened this Organization for a quarter of a century has been softened.
42.	The United States and the Soviet Union have perceived a commonality of interests in avoiding nuclear holocaust and in establishing a broad web of constructive relationships. Talks on stretegic arms limitation have already produced historic accords aimed at slowing the arms race and ensuring strategic stability; we have today resumed negotiations on this subject. The positive results we hope for will enhance the security of all mankind.
43.	Two decades of estrangement between the United States and the People's Republic of China have given way to constructive dialogue and productive exchanges. President Nixon has met with the leaders of that great nation; we have agreed to a historic communique  that honestly sets forth both our differences and our common principles; and we have each opened a liaison office in the capital of the other.
44.	Many other countries have seized the initiative and contributed, in substance and spirit, to the relaxation of tensions. The nations of Europe and North America are engaged in a conference to further security and cooperation. The two German States have taken their place in this Assembly. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh have begun to move towards a welcome reconciliation. North and South Korea are at last engaged in a dialogue which, we hope, will lead to a new era of peace and security between them.
45.	Yet these achievements, solid as they are, have only made less precarious the dangers and divisions inherited from the post-war era. We have ended many of the confrontations of the cold war; yet, even in this room, the vocabulary of suspicion persists. Relaxation of tensions is justified by some as merely a practical interlude before renewed struggle. Others suspect the emergence of a two- Power condominium. And as tension between the two original blocs has eased, a third grouping increasingly assumes the characteristics of a bloc of its own — the alignment of the non-aligned.
46.	So the world is uneasily suspended between old slogans and new realities, between a view of peace as but a pause in an unending struggle and a vision of peace as a promise of global co-operation.
47.	In 1946 James Byrnes, the first Secretary of State to address this Assembly, spoke of how the United Nations could 'help to break down habits of thinking in national isolation and go far to bring about understanding and tolerance.' 
48.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world of uneasy truces, of offsetting blocs, of accommodations of convenience. We know that power can enforce a resigned passivity, but only a sense of justice can enlist consensus. We strive for a peace whose stability rests not merely on a balance of forces, but on shared aspirations. We are convinced that a structure which ignores humane values will prove cold and empty and unfulfilling to most of mankind.
49.	The United States deeply believes that justice cannot be confined by national frontiers; that truth is universal, and not the peculiar possession of a single people or group or ideology; that compassion and humanity must ennoble all our endeavours.
50.	In this spirit we ask this Assembly to move with us from detente among the big Powers to co-operation among all nations, from coexistence to community.
51.	Our journey must begin with the world as it is and with the issues now before us. The United States will spare no effort to ease tensions further and to move towards greater stability. We shall continue, in the spirit of the Shanghai communique, our search for a new relationship with the People's Republic of China. We shall work to promote positive trends elsewhere in Asia. The uncertain peace in Indo-China must be strenghened; the world community cannot afford, or permit, a relapse into war in that region. We shall continue to pursue vigorously the building of constructive relationships with the Soviet Union. We shall strive to promote conciliation in Europe. In the negotiations beginning next month we shall seek a reduction of the military forces that have faced each other for so long across that divided continent. We shall give new vigour to our policy of partnership in the Western hemisphere. We shall honour our pledge to promote self- determination, economic development and human dignity across the continent of Africa. We shall press on with strategic arms limitations talks. We consider them crucial for security and stability in this period. We shall search for solutions to the world-wide problem of conventional weapons, which drain our resources and fuel the fires of local conflict.
52.	In all these efforts the United States will be guided by certain fundamental principles.
53.	We have no desire for domination. We will oppose — as we have consistently opposed throughout this century — any nation that chooses this path. We have not been asked to participate in a condominium; we would reject such an appeal if it were made.
54.	We will never abandon our allies or our friends. The strengthening of our traditional ties is the essential foundation for the development of new relationships with old adversaries.
55.	We will work for peace through the United Nations as well as through bilateral relationships.
56.	We recognize our special obligation, as a permanent member of the Security Council, to assist in the search for just solutions in those parts of the world now torn by strife, such as the Middle East. While we cannot substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved, we are prepared to use our influence to generate a spirit of accommodation and to urge the parties towards practical progress.
57.	But progress on the traditional agenda is not enough. The more we succeed in solving political problems, the more other and perhaps deeper challenges emerge. As the world grows more stable we must confront the question of the ends of detente. As the threat of war recedes, the problem of the quality of life takes on more urgent significance.
58.	We are, in fact, members of a community drawn by modern science, technology and new forms of communication into a proximity for which we are still politically unprepared. Technology daily outstrips the ability of our institutions to cope with its fruits. Our political imagination must catch up with our scientific vision. This is at the same time the greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity of this Organization.
59.	The pollution of the skies, the seas and the land is a global problem.
60.	The increased consumption of cereals has reduced world food reserves to dangerously low levels.
61.	The demand for energy is outrunning supply, and the need for technological innovation is urgent.
62.	The growth of the world's economy is inhibited by restrictive trading blocs and an insufficiently flexible international monetary system.
63.	The exploitation of the resources of the ocean beds, which is essential for the needs of burgeoning populations, requires global co-operation lest it degenerate into global contention.
64.	Challenges of this magnitude cannot be solved by a world fragmented into self-contained nation States or rigid blocs.
65.	I do not intend, today, to cover the whole agenda of international co-operation. Rather, I shall speak briefly of some illustrative areas for common action. I pledge the readiness of the United States to solve these problems co-operatively and to submit proposals Jmed at their resolution.
66.	First, a world community requires the curbing of conflicts. The United Nations, in its 28-year history, has not always been idle in this sphere. In Indonesia, the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, the Congo, and Cyprus, it has shown its ability for effective fact-finding, mediation and peace-keeping missions. This central aspect of the United Nations work must be strengthened. On a small planet, so bound together by technology and so interdependent economically, we can no longer afford the constant eruption of conflict and the danger of its spread.
67.	Yet, in recent years, we have found ourselves locked in fruitless debates about the inauguration of peace-keeping operations and over the degree of control the Security Council would exercise over peace-keeping machinery — an impasse which has ensured that permanent peace-keeping machinery would not come into being. Each peace-keeping unit we have formed has been an improvisation growing out of argument and controversy.
68.	We should delay no longer. The time has come to agree on peace-keeping guidelines so that this Organization can act swiftly, confidently and effectively in future crises. To break the deadlock, the United States is prepared to consider how the Security Council can play a more central role in the conduct of peace-keeping operations. If- all countries concerned approach this problem with a desire to achieve a co-operative solution, the United Nations can achieve a major step forward during this session.
69.	Secondly, a world community must have the widest possible membership. The exclusion of any qualified State denies representation not only to Governments, but to peoples. Membership in this body should be a step towards reconciliation, not a source of conflict. The time has come for North and South Korea to be offered their rightful place here without prejudice to a future evolution towards unification. In this spirit also, we support the permanent membership of Japan in the Security Council.
70.	Thirdly, a world community must assure that all its people are fed. The growing threat to the world's food supply deserves the urgent attention of this Assembly. Since 1969, global consumption of cereals has risen more rapidly than production; stocks are at the lowest levels in years. We now face the prospect that, even with bumper crops, the world may not rebuild its seriously depleted reserves in this decade.
71.	No one country can cope with this problem. The United States therefore proposes that a world food conference should be organized under United Nations auspices in 1974 to discuss ways to maintain adequate food supplies and to harness the efforts of all nations to meet the hunger and malnutrition resulting from natural disasters and that nations in a position to do so offer technical assistance in the conservation of food. The United States is ready to join with others in providing such assistance.
72.	Fourthly, a world community cannot remain divided between the permanently rich and the permanently poor. Let us therefore resolve that this Assembly, this year, initiate a search, drawing on the world's best minds, for new and imaginative solutions to the problems of development. Our search must be candid and realistic, but it must also be free of peremptory demands, antagonistic propositions, ideological confrontation, or propagandistic rhetoric, or we will surely fail.
73.	The United States is prepared to join this new search, providing freely of the experience gained over two decades. We have learned not to exaggerate our capacity to transform nations, but we have also learned much about what progress is possible. We will participate without pre-conditions, with a conciliatory attitude and a co-operative commitment. We ask only that others adopt the same approach.
74.	In this spirit, the United States is willing to examine seriously the proposal by the distinguished President of Mexico for a charter of the economic rights and duties of States.' Such a document will make a significant and historic contribution if it reflects the true aspirations of all nations; it will accomplish nothing if it is turned into an indictment of one group of countries by another. To command general support, and to be implemented, the proposed rights and duties must be defined equitably and take into account the concerns of industrialized as well as of developing countries. The United States stands ready to define its responsibilities in a humane and co-operative spirit.
75.	Fifthly, a world community must harness science and technology for the benefit of all. We must begin to match our remarkable technological skills with our equally remarkable technological needs. We must find the means for the co-operative and judicious development of energy resources. We must responsibly confront the problems of population growth, which are fast pushing humanity towards the limits of what our earth can sustain. We must embark on a new scientific revolution to increase agricultural productivity in all lands. No field of human endeavour is so dependent upon an open world for its advancement, no field is so in need of international co-operation to cope with its potential dangers.
76.	Are we prepared to accept the imperatives of a global society and infuse our labours with new vision? Or shall we content ourselves with a temporary pause in the turmoil that has racked our century? Shall we proceed with one-sided demands and sterile confrontation? Or shall we proceed in a spirit of compromise produced by a sense of common destiny? We are convinced that we must move from hesitant co-operation born of necessity to genuine collective effort based on common purpose.
77.	It is a choice no country can make alone. We can repeat old slogans or strive for new hope. We can fill the record of our proceedings with acrimony, or we can dedicate ourselves to dealing with man's deepest needs. The ideal of a world community may be decried as unrealistic, but great constructions have always been ideals before they can become realities. Let us therefore dedicate ourselves to this noblest of all possible goals and achieve at last what has so long eluded us: true understanding and tolerance among mankind.Let me first congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your election as President of the General
Assembly for its forty-ninth session. The American people
look forward to working with you to celebrate the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary.
We meet today at a time of great hope and change.
The end of the cold war, the explosion of technology and
trade and enterprise have given people the world over new
opportunities to live up to their dreams and their God-given
potential. This is an age of hope -yet in this new world,
we face a contest as old as history.
It is a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between
tolerance and bigotry; between knowledge and ignorance;
between openness and isolation. It is a fight between those
who would build free societies governed by laws and
those who would impose their will by force.
Our struggle today - in a world more high-tech,
more fast-moving, more chaotically diverse than ever - is
the age-old fight between hope and fear.
Three times in this century - from the trenches of the
Somme to the island of Iwo Jima to the shattered Wall in
Berlin - the forces of hope were victorious. But the
victors of the First World War squandered their triumph
when they turned inward, bringing on a global depression,
and allowing fascism to rise and reignite global war.
After the Second World War, the Allies learned the
lesson of the past. In the face of a new totalitarian threat
and the nuclear menace, great nations did not walk away
from the challenge of the moment. Instead they chose to
reach out, to rebuild and to lead. They chose to create the
United Nations and they left us a world stronger, safer
and freer.
Our generation has a difficult task: the cold war is
over. We must secure the peace. It falls to us to avoid
the complacency that followed the First World War -
without the spur of the imminent threat to our security
that followed the Second World War.
We must ensure that those who fought and found the
courage to end the cold war - those from both East and
West who loved freedom - did not labour in vain. Our
sacred mission is to build a new world for our children -
more democratic, more prosperous, more free of ancient
hatreds and modern means of destruction.
That is no easy challenge; but we accept it with
confidence. After all, the walls that once divided nations
in this very Hall have come down. More nations have
chosen democracy than ever before. More have chosen
free markets and economic justice. More have embraced
the values of tolerance and liberty and civil society that
allow us all to make the most of our lives.
But while the ideals of democracy and free markets
are ascendant, they are surely not the whole story.
Terrible examples of chaos, repression and tyranny also
mark our times. The twentieth century has proved that
the forces of freedom and democracy can endure against
great odds; our job is to see that in the twenty-first
century these forces triumph.
6


The dangers we face are less stark and more diffuse
than those of the cold war, but they are still formidable:
the ethnic conflicts that drive millions from their homes;
the despots ready to repress their own people or conquer
their neighbours; the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; the terrorists wielding their deadly arms; the
criminal syndicates selling those arms, or drugs, infiltrating
the very institutions of fragile democracies; a global
economy that offers great promise but also deep insecurity,
and in many places declining opportunity; diseases like
AIDS that threaten to decimate nations; the combined
dangers of population explosion and economic decline,
which prompted the world community to reach the
remarkable consensus at the Cairo Conference; global and
local environmental threats that demand that sustainable
development become a part of the lives of people all
around the world; and, finally, within many of our nations,
high rates of drug abuse and crime and family breakdown,
with all their terrible consequences. These are the dangers
we face today.
We must address these threats to our future.
Thankfully, the end of the cold war gives us a chance to
address them together. In our efforts, different nations may
be active in different situations in different ways, but their
purposes must be consistent with freedom and their
practices consistent with international law. Each nation will
bring to our common task its own particular strengths -
economic, political or military.
Of course, the first duty of every Member of the
United Nations is to its own citizens, to their security, their
welfare and their interests. As President of the United
States, my first duty is to the citizens of my country.
When our national security interests are threatened, we will
act with others when we can, but alone if we must. We
will use diplomacy when we can, but force if we must.
The United States recognizes that we also have a
special responsibility in these common endeavours that we
are undertaking, the responsibility that goes along with
great power and also with our long history of democracy
and freedom. But we seek to fulfil that responsibility in
cooperation with other nations. Working together increases
the impact and the legitimacy of each of our actions, and
sharing the burdens lessens everyone’s load. We have no
desire to be the world’s policeman, but we will do what we
can to help civil societies emerge from the ashes of
repression, to sustain fragile democracies, to add more free
markets to the world, and of course to restrain the
destructive forces that threaten us all.
In every corner of the globe, from South Africa to
Asia, to Central and Eastern Europe, to the Middle East
and Latin America, and now to a small island in the
Caribbean, ordinary citizens are striving to build their
own future. Promoting their cause is our generation’s
great opportunity, and we must do it together. A
coalition for democracy is good for America.
Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less
likely to wage war; they strengthen civil society and can
provide people with the economic and political
opportunities to build their futures in their own homes -
not to flee their borders.
Our efforts to help build more democracies will
make us all more secure, more prosperous and more
successful as we try to make this era of terrific change
our friend, and not our enemy. In my nation, as in all of
your nations, there are many people who are
understandably reluctant to undertake these efforts
because often the distances are great or the cultures are
different. There are good reasons for the caution that
people feel. Often, the chances of success or its costs are
unclear. And, of course, in every common endeavour
there is always the potential for failure and often the risk
of loss of life.
And yet our people - as we have seen in the
remarkable global response to the terrible crisis in
Rwanda - genuinely want to help their neighbours around
the world and to make some effort in our common cause.
We have seen that progress can be made as well. The
problem is deciding when we must respond and how we
shall overcome our reluctance. This will never be easy.
There are no simple formulas. All of us will make these
decisions in part based on the distance of the problem
from our shores, the interests of our nation, the difference
we think we can make, the costs required, or the threat to
our own citizens in the endeavour.
Hard questions will remain, and cannot be erased by
some simple formula. But we should have the confidence
that these efforts can succeed, whether they are efforts to
keep people alive in the face of terrible tragedy, as in
Rwanda, or our efforts to avert a tragedy, as in the Horn
of Africa, or our efforts to support processes that are
literally changing the future of millions. History is on
our side. We should have confidence about this. Look
at the march of freedom we have seen in the last year
alone. Who, a decade ago, would have dared predict the
startling changes in South Africa, in the Middle East and
in Ireland; the stunning triumph of democracy and
majority rule and the redemption of the purpose of Nelson
7


Mandela’s life; the brave efforts of Israel and its Arab
neighbours to build bridges of peace between their peoples;
the earnest search by the people of Northern Ireland and
Great Britain and Ireland to end centuries of division and
decades of terror? In each case, credit belongs to those
nations’ leaders and their courageous people. But in each
instance the United States and other nations were privileged
to help in these causes.
The growth of cooperation between the United States
and the Russian Federation also should give us all great
cause for confidence. This is a partnership that is rooted in
democracy, a partnership that is working, a partnership of,
not complete agreement, but genuine mutual respect. After
so many years of nuclear terror, our two nations are taking
dramatic steps to ease tensions around the world. For the
first time since the Second World War, foreign troops do
not occupy the nations of Central and Eastern Europe. The
Baltic nations are free. Russian and American missiles no
longer target each other’s people. Three of the four nuclear
members of the former Soviet Union have agreed to
remove all nuclear weapons from their soil. And we are
working on agreements to halt production of fissile
materials for nuclear explosives; to make dismantling of
nuclear warheads transparent and irreversible; and further
to reduce our nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
The United States and Russia also recognize that we
must cooperate to control the emerging danger of terrorists
who traffic in nuclear materials. To secure nuclear
materials at their sources, we have agreed with Russia to
stop plutonium production by the year 2000; to construct a
storage facility for fissile materials and buy up stocks of
weapons-grade fuel; and to combat the criminals who are
trying to smuggle materials for nuclear explosives. Our
two nations and Germany have increased cooperation and
engaged in joint anti-terrorist training. Soon, under the
leadership of our Federal Bureau of Investigation, we will
open a law enforcement training academy in Europe, where
police will learn how to combat more effectively trafficking
of nuclear weapons components, as well as the drug trade,
organized crime and money laundering.
The United States will also advance a wide-ranging
non-proliferation agenda: a global convention to halt
production of fissile materials; efforts to curb North
Korea’s nuclear ambitions; transparent procedures for
dismantling nuclear warheads; and our work to ban testing
and to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. And today I am proposing a first step
toward the eventual elimination of a less visible but still
deadly threat: the world’s 85 million anti-personnel land-
mines - one for every 50 persons on the face of the earth.
I ask all nations concerned to join with us and conclude
an agreement to reduce the number and availability of
those mines. Ridding the world of those often hidden
weapons will help to save the lives of tens of thousands
of men, women and innocent children in the years to
come.
Our progress in the last year also provides
confidence that in the post-cold-war years we can adapt
and construct global institutions that will help to provide
security and increase economic growth throughout the
world. Since I spoke here last year, 22 nations have
joined the Partnership for Peace of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). The first joint exercises
have been conducted, helping to give Europe the chance
to become a more unified continent in which democratic
nations live within secure borders. In Asia, security talks
and economic cooperation will lead to further stability.
By reducing nations’ fears about their borders and
allowing them to spend less on military defences, our
coalition for democracy can give nations in transition a
better chance to offer new freedoms and opportunities to
their own people. It is time that we think anew about the
structures of this global economy as well, tearing down
walls that separate nations instead of hiding behind them.
At the Group of Seven meeting at Naples this year
we committed ourselves to this task of renewal, to re-
examining the economic institutions that have served us
so well in the past. In the interests of shared prosperity,
the United States actively promotes open markets.
Though still in its infancy, the North American Free
Trade Agreement has dramatically increased trade
between the United States and Mexico and has produced
in the United States alone an estimated 200,000 new jobs.
It offers a model to nations throughout the Americas
which we hope to build on. And this week I will send
legislation to the Congress to implement the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the largest
trade agreement in all of history. GATT - and its
successor, the World Trade Organization - holds the
promise for all of us of increased exports, higher wages
and improved living standards. In the months and years
to come we will work no less to extend the reach of open
markets, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Council and the Summit of the Americas
later this year.
Here at the United Nations we must develop a
concrete plan to meet the challenges of the next 50 years
even as we celebrate the last 50 years. I believe we
8


should declare next year’s fiftieth anniversary not just a
year of celebration but a year of renewal. We call on the
Secretary-General to name a working group so that by the
time we meet next year we will have a concrete action plan
to revitalize the obligations of the United Nations to address
the security, economic and political challenges ahead -
obligations we must all be willing to assume.
Our objectives should include ready, efficient and
capable United Nations peace-keeping forces, and I am
happy to report that, as I pledged last year and thanks to
support in the United States Congress, $1.2 billion is now
available from the United States for this critical account.
We must also pledge to keep United Nations reform
moving forward so that we do more with less, and we must
improve our ability to respond to urgent needs. Let me
suggest that it is time for the members of the Assembly to
consider seriously President Menem’s suggestion for the
creation of a civilian rapid-response capability for
humanitarian crises.
And let us not lose sight of the special role that
development and democracy can play in preventing
conflicts once peace has been established. Never before
has the United Nations been in a better position to achieve
the democratic goals of our founders. The end of the cold
war has freed us from decades of paralysing divisions. And
we all know that multilateral cooperation is not only
necessary to address the new threats we face but possible
to succeed.
The efforts we have undertaken together in Haiti are
a prime example. Under the sponsorship of the United
Nations, American troops, now being joined by the
personnel of an ever-growing international coalition of over
two dozen nations, are giving the people of Haiti their
chance at freedom. Creative diplomacy, the influence of
economic power and the credible threat of military force -
all have contributed to this moment of opportunity.
Essential civil order will be restored. Human rights
violations will be curbed. The first refugees will be
returning within hours, on this day. The military leaders
will step down. The democratic Government will be
restored. President Aristide will return. The multinational
mission will turn its responsibilities over to the United
Nations mission, which will remain in Haiti throughout
1995, until a new president is elected. During this time a
multinational development effort will make available more
than $1 billion to begin helping the Haitians rebuild their
country. In the spirit of reconciliation and reconstruction,
President Aristide yesterday called for the immediate easing
of sanctions so that the work of rebuilding can begin
immediately. Accordingly, I intend to act expeditiously,
within Security Council resolutions 917 (1994) and 940
(1994) to enable us to restore health care, water and
electrical services, construction materials for humanitarian
efforts, and communications, agricultural and educational
materials.
Today I am also announcing that the United States
will suspend all unilateral sanctions against Haiti except
those that affect the military leaders and their immediate
supporters. This will include regularly scheduled air
flights when the airport becomes available, financial
transactions and travel restrictions. I urge all other
nations to do the same.
In Haiti, the United States has demonstrated that it
would lead a multinational force when our interests are
plain, when the cause is right, when the mission is
achievable and the nations of the world stand with us.
But Haiti’s people will have to muster the strength and
the patience to travel the road of freedom. They have to
do this for themselves. Every new democratic nation is
fragile. But we will see the day when the people of Haiti
fulfil their aspirations to liberty and when they are once
again making genuine economic progress.
United Nations actions in Bosnia, like those in Haiti,
demonstrate that progress can be made when a coalition
backs up diplomacy with military power. For the first
time ever, NATO has taken, since we met last year,
military actions beyond the territory of its members. The
threat of NATO air power helped to establish the
exclusion zone around Sarajevo and to end the Bosnian
Serbs’ spring offensive against Gorazde. NATO’s
February ultimatum boosted our mediation efforts, which
helped to end the war between the Bosnian Government
and the Bosnian Croats and forged a federation between
those two communities. To that extent the situation in
Bosnia has improved, but in recent weeks the situation
around Sarajevo has deteriorated substantially, and
Sarajevo once again faces the prospect of strangulation.
A new resolve by the United Nations to enforce its
resolutions is now necessary to save Sarajevo, and NATO
stands ready to act.
The situation in Bosnia is yet another reminder of
the greatest irony of this century we are leaving. This
century, so full of hope and opportunity and achievement,
has also been an age of deep destruction and despair. We
cannot help but remember the millions who gave their
lives during two world wars and the half century of
9


struggle by men and women in the East and West who
ultimately prevailed in the name of freedom.
But we must also think of our children and the world
we will leave them in the twenty-first century. History has
given us a very rare opportunity - the chance to build on
the greatest legacy of this century without reliving its
darkest moments. And we have shown that we can carry
forward humanity’s ancient quest for freedom to build a
world where democracy knows no borders but where
nations know their borders will always be secure, a world
that gives all people the chance to realize their potential and
to live out their dreams.
Canada is very pleased, Sir, that you have been elected to
the presidency of the Assembly, and it is certain that you
will, with tact and efficiency, assume the responsibility of
guiding our work. You can count on our full cooperation.
The United Nations has always had a special place in
Canada’s foreign policy. As I address the Assembly for the
first time as Minister of Foreign Affairs, I am reminded of
something one of my illustrious predecessors, Lester B.
Pearson, said about the United Nations:
'We must cultivate international ideals, develop
international policies, strengthen international
institutions, above all the United Nations, so that
peace and progress can be made secure.'
The Government that I represent shares his broad and
noble vision of the role and place of the United Nations.
In order to face the challenges that await it at the dawn of
the twenty-first century, the international community needs,
more than ever, a strong, credible multilateral institution
equipped with the tools needed to fulfil our expectations.
These challenges are the maintenance of peace and
international security, as well as development, justice,
democracy, human rights and the fight against inequalities.
At a time when we are preparing to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, there is no more
urgent task than the intensification of our efforts for
reform in order to give our Organization the second wind
it needs. Let us draw inspiration from the vision and
enthusiasm of the people who drafted the Charter of the
United Nations 50 years ago.
The extensive upheavals that have shaken our planet
since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the cold
war can be symbolized in a few images. I am thinking of
the moving image of President Nelson Mandela taking the
oath of office as democratically elected President of South
Africa and the historic handshake between Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin and the Palestine Liberation Organization
leader, Yasser Arafat. For their people and those in
Cambodia, El Salvador - and soon, perhaps, Mozambique
and Angola - who have discovered the road to peace, with
the help of the United Nations, the future is filled with
hope.
There is also hope in Haiti, where a courageous
people has been subjected for too long to oppression and
abject poverty. We shall share their joy when they can
finally welcome to his native land President Aristide, a
living symbol of nascent democracy.
But there are also unbearable images of the victims
in the market in Sarajevo and the flood of humanity
fleeing the killings in Rwanda.
The international community cannot remain
indifferent to conflicts that threaten the lives of millions
of innocent people and expose them to the worst
violations of their most fundamental rights. Recent
experience has shown us that only a concerted and
determined effort on the part of the international
community can solve these problems.
It is no easy task. Faced with the problems in
Bosnia, Somalia, Rwanda or even Haiti, some people will
be tempted to give up and wonder if the United Nations
is wrong in trying to resolve essentially internal conflicts
that have numerous complex causes.
Canada does not share this opinion. We think that,
despite these problems, the Security Council is on the
right track, even though the steps it has taken have not
always proved capable of solving all the problems.
Consistent with that belief, we have always made a
tangible contribution to United Nations operations, as far
as our circumstances permit.
9


The Canadian contribution to peace-keeping operations
in the territories of the former Yugoslavia totals more than
2,000 soldiers and civilian police. The Canadian
Government decided a few days ago to renew once more
the mandate of its troops for a six-month period. Canada
has always been convinced that there can be no military
solution to the Yugoslavian conflict. It is because we wish
to give peace another chance that we have chosen to
maintain our contribution to the United Nations Protection
Force.
We have also responded to the Secretary-General’s
appeal for help in the tragedy of Rwanda. For two months
ours was the only country providing an air bridge to Kigali.
There are 600 Canadian soldiers serving under the United
Nations flag, and many Canadian non-governmental
organizations have mobilized to provide help to those in
distress.
We will also be in Haiti, with 600 soldiers and 100
police officers when the time comes to deploy the United
Nations peace-keeping force. Our participation is a logical
sequel to our numerous efforts of the past three years to
restore the democratic process in this country, to which we
are attached by language, geographical proximity and the
many personal ties between our peoples. The Haitian
people can count on Canada’s lasting help as they rebuild
their economy.
We are also contributing to the Middle East peace
process. As the leader of the multilateral Working Group
on Refugees, we are tackling with determination that task
entrusted to us by the international community. Our
objective is to contribute to the construction of a renewed
region where, 10 years hence, no one will consider himself
or herself a refugee. We are also providing substantial
financial assistance to the Palestinian people’s
reconstruction projects. We would favourably consider
sending peace-keepers if the need should arise, thus
carrying on a lengthy tradition of Canadian participation in
peace-keeping operations in the region.
(spoke in English)
The economic and social problems facing the
international community often receive less headline
attention than the armed conflicts. However, they are every
bit as urgent. Hundreds of millions of people around the
world continue to be condemned to a life of poverty. For
whole sectors of humanity, such basic needs as a proper
diet, drinking water, education and medical care are more
of a dream than a reality.
Certain parts of the developing world are currently
experiencing remarkable progress, while others,
unfortunately - the African continent in particular - are
continuing to struggle.
It is estimated that there are an unprecedented 19
million refugees and displaced persons in the world. We
are witnessing a massive movement of people that none
of our societies is able to manage without the cooperation
of the entire international community.
The recent Cairo Conference revealed the urgent
need for effective measures to cope with the problems of
population and development, problems that cannot be
resolved without giving full recognition to the essential
roles of women.
Our ability to translate into reality the concept of
sustainable development will have a very direct impact on
the daily lives of our fellow citizens. The fishermen of
Newfoundland and the Maritime Provinces of Canada are
all too familiar with this problem. Their livelihood has
disappeared, through the plundering of fish stocks in
international waters off our shores. This is why we
believe an agreement must be reached without delay on
fishing on the high seas.
We could easily add to the list of pressing problems
that I have just mentioned. And no one can challenge the
fact that all of these problems - from peace-keeping to
development, including the fight against AIDS, drug-
trafficking and the protection of human rights and the
environment - require a determined, coordinated effort on
the part of the international community.
A great deal has been done over the past few years
to help our multilateral institutions to effectively face
these numerous challenges. However, much more needs
to be done. Too often, the intervention of the United
Nations comes too late, is too slow and is carried out
under inadequate conditions.
The lack of political will on the part of Member
States cannot be blamed on the Secretary-General. On
the contrary, I would like to pay special tribute to the
Secretary-General and his staff. They have done more
and better than anyone should expect from an institution
deprived of the most elementary resources, lacking even
a solid financial foundation.
We must fully assume our responsibilities and give
the United Nations the tools required to fulfil its unique
10


mandate successfully. However, it seems that we are
unable to take a second look at the habits of the past.
We invest too much energy in activities of marginal
use and in unimportant quarrels when there is an
emergency right under our noses.
We waste valuable resources by allowing the
numerous institutions and agencies we have created over
the years to jealously protect their independence and resist
change when circumstances require a pooling of energies.
As a result of our extreme reticence to implement
administrative reforms, we are handicapping the only
institution on which we can depend, when modern and
flexible management methods would enable us to respond
much more effectively to the needs of the moment.
Canada believes that the reforms of the United Nations
system must be deepened and accelerated. We must do
more and better with the resources at our disposal.
Efforts should be concentrated on the following five
major priorities, which I would like to bring to your
attention.
Firstly, we must strengthen the United Nations
system’s capacity for preventive action. The United
Nations already has a number of tools for detecting
potential conflicts, and can use a variety of mechanisms to
try to eliminate problems before crises break out. Lack of
information is not the problem; what we need is the ability
to better analyse this information, to develop appropriate
strategies and above all to mobilize energy from all
components of the system.
In order to act rapidly, the United Nations must be
able to count on qualified human resources, available on
short notice, to complement its own personnel. This is why
Canada has prepared for the Secretary-General an inventory
of resource persons suited to missions of good offices or
specializing in elections, human rights, the administration
of justice and other such fields.
At its first summit in January 1992, the Security
Council recognized that non-military sources of instability
in the economic, social, humanitarian and ecological fields
have become threats to international peace and security.
Let us recognize once and for all the need to expand the
traditional concept of security, and to mobilize all
components of the United Nations system to attack conflict
at its very roots.
We also feel that the preventive capacity of the
United Nations system will be strengthened if we make
better use of the expertise of those who have direct
knowledge of the field. The United Nations Economic
and Social Council should periodically hold public
hearings, similar to those held last June on the Agenda
for Development, with a view to assisting the United
Nations to better anticipate problems and to develop
strategies for attacking the economic and social causes of
conflicts. The findings of its hearings could and should
be provided to the Security Council and the Secretary-
General so that they can develop appropriate preventive
measures.
Any strategy for preventing armed conflicts also
involves pursuing tangible disarmament objectives.
Canada has established two priority objectives for the
next few years: nuclear non-proliferation and the control
of conventional arms.
Nuclear arms control and disarmament are under
way: we are continuing negotiations on a comprehensive
test-ban treaty to ban nuclear testing for all time. Canada
is working in the Conference on Disarmament to secure
a mandate for negotiations on a convention to prohibit the
production of fissile material for weapons purposes.
Together, these treaties will have the effect of
constraining and preventing a future nuclear arms race.
In 1995 we will have to decide the fate of the
world’s nuclear non-proliferation regime; the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is very
important for Canada, and we believe that there is only
one option: that the NPT must be indefinitely extended.
I urge all Governments to support this option, which will
allow for the continuation of a crucial instrument in
preventing the spread of nuclear-weapon technology and
provide new impetus to reduce existing stocks.
We must also recognize that, although the threat of
nuclear weapons is of prime concern, the ongoing use of
conventional weapons is an equally dangerous and very
real threat to peace and security.
The task of controlling conventional weapons is the
responsibility of every Government. Huge sums are
being spent each year purchasing such weapons, often to
the detriment of services essential to the public, such as
education and health care. Those who are more
concerned about the size of their military arsenal than
about the welfare of their people should no longer expect
to receive unconditional international aid.
11


The recently established United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms is a start, and I urge Member States to
make information available to the Register as Canada has
done.
More can be done, however. For example, next year
we will be reviewing the Convention on certain
conventional weapons that deals with land-mines. The
abuse of land-mines is responsible for continued suffering
and death of civilians long after the fighting has stopped.
I welcome the proposal made by President Clinton on
Monday to reduce and eventually eliminate the use of anti-
personnel land mines. He can count on the support and
assistance of the Government of Canada on this useful idea.
We must strengthen the Convention by extending its scope
to cover internal as well as international conflicts and by
insisting on effective verification measures to ensure
compliance. We will create a task force in Canada to
consider other initiatives that might be taken in the coming
months, and I look forward to sharing ideas on this subject
with other ministers.
Secondly, we must conduct an in-depth review of the
United Nations economic and social activities. I think I
speak for most members of the Assembly when I express
serious concerns regarding what can best be described as
the drift of the United Nations in the economic and social
sectors. While the debate on the United Nations mandate
in the areas of peace and security is lively and productive,
it is unfortunately too often vague and directionless when
we tackle economic and social problems.
We are not saying that everything must be changed -
far from it. But certain reforms have already been
introduced; to mention but one, we welcome the decision
to make the United Nations Development Programme
Administrator responsible for system-wide coordination.
But at a time when large sectors of international economic
activities are beyond the control of States, and when the
resources devoted to development and international
cooperation are subject to all manner of constraint in all of
our countries, we must rethink the role and mandate of all
our multilateral institutions, including those of Bretton
Woods. These questions will be taken up at next year’s
Group of Seven summit, to be held in Halifax, and should
be debated as widely as possible within other relevant
institutions.
Canada is ready to proceed with a comprehensive re-
evaluation of its multilateral system as it applies to
economic and social issues. If necessary, the relevance of
certain institutions must be rethought, and a real solution
must be found to the problem of duplication.
We expect great things of the next chapter of the
Secretary-General’s Agenda for Development. We share
to a great extent his visions of development, which
encompass all facets of human activity, and particularly
its social dimensions. Although the full importance of
these dimensions has finally been grasped, they are still
poorly integrated in our development strategies. The time
has come to translate this vision into new operational
priorities and to adapt our institutions and structures to it.
The Secretary-General should not hesitate to recommend
radical reform if necessary. Together we can restore the
relevance and leadership of the United Nations system.
We must adapt it to the new realities of an ever-changing
world.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the rapid-intervention
capability of the United Nations. The implementation of
a number of the proposals advanced by the Secretary-
General in 'An Agenda for Peace' has enabled the United
Nations to make great strides in the area of peace-
keeping. Last April the Government of Canada took the
initiative of inviting the major troop-contributing countries
to a meeting in Ottawa to discuss problems associated
with political direction, command and control and the
training of peace-keeping- operations personnel.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that Canada
will soon open a centre for peace-keeping research and
training. The centre, to be located on the site of the
former military base in Cornwallis, Nova Scotia, will be
named after Lester B. Pearson, Canadian recipient of the
Nobel Peace Prize. I invite Member States to come and
join us so they can share our experience and help fine-
tune our future approach.
The experience of the last few years leads us to
believe that we need to explore even more innovative
options than those considered to date. Recent peace-
keeping missions have demonstrated the limitations of the
traditional approach. As we now fully realize, rapid
deployment of intervention forces is essential.
In the light of the prevailing situation, the
Government of Canada has decided to conduct an in-
depth review of the short-, medium- and long-term
options available to us to strengthen the rapid-response
capability of the United Nations in times of crisis. From
among these options, we feel that the time has come to
study the possibility, over the long term, of creating a
12


permanent United Nations military force. We will ask the
world’s leading experts for their input and will inform all
Member States of the results of the study.
(spoke in French)
Fourthly, we must improve the functioning of United
Nations decision-making bodies.
The Security Council currently bears enormous
responsibilities. Its decisions are binding on all Member
States and have a determining influence on millions of
people. It is essential that the Council be able to reflect as
accurately as possible the wishes of the entire international
community. For this reason, it is imperative that the
composition of the Council be reviewed. By making the
Council more representative of today’s world, we can
enhance the legitimacy of its actions and facilitate their
implementation. Canada will continue to play an active
role in the negotiations launched during the last session of
the General Assembly, with a view to concluding an
agreement as soon as possible.
However, an expanded Council must not be seen as a
panacea. As we have said on a number of occasions, the
Council must make its working methods more transparent
and become more receptive to the viewpoints of non-
member States with special concerns. More specifically,
Canada has advocated closer dialogue between the Council
and troop-contributing countries. The informal practices
developed in recent years are a good start, but in our view
we must look for practical ways to institutionalize them.
We ask the members of the Council to keep an open mind
in this regard.
Finally, we must put the United Nations on a sound
financial footing.
It goes without saying that the United Nations can
fulfil the mandates we give it only to the extent that
Member States meet their financial obligations and
contribute generously to its voluntary funds. The sums in
question are no doubt modest when compared with those
invested elsewhere, but they represent none the less a
burden that is already significant and growing larger at a
time when many of our countries, Canada most definitely
included, are going through a difficult period of budgetary
adjustment.
Our taxpayers do not question the need to contribute
to the United Nations, but they are entitled to expect that
their contributions will be spent judiciously. That is why
we attach such great importance to the need for sound
management of the system’s resources. The recent
creation of the new position of inspector general should
help tighten controls and improve administrative practices.
There is also a need to review budgetary procedures in
order to make them more transparent and to simplify
those that govern peace-keeping operations.
Reviewing the scale of assessments is always a
perilous undertaking, but I believe the need to do so has
become urgent. The current system suffers from serious
distortions and no longer reflects properly Member States’
ability to pay. We hope the General Assembly will make
this a priority issue at the current session.
In the final analysis, the future of the United Nations
depends on the willingness of its Member States to lend
it political and practical support. This support depends in
turn on the degree of support the Organization receives
from our respective citizenries. It is not only Member
States’ credibility that is at stake, but, even more
important, that of the United Nations.
Governments must strive to work together and in
cooperation with private enterprise and non-governmental
organizations to define our new vision of the United
Nations for the next century. This is, in part, why the
Canadian Government has provided support to the
Canadian Committee for the Fiftieth Anniversary of the
United Nations. That Committee, which brings together
leaders from all sectors, has prepared a remarkable
programme of activities to commemorate the anniversary
everywhere in our country. The emphasis is being placed
on youth education and the main subjects of the United
Nations agenda.
Next year at this time, all eyes will be turned
towards the General Assembly. Let us make that
anniversary the beginning of a new era for the United
Nations.
During the past few years the world has made remarkable advances toward the Charter goal of practicing tolerance and living together in peace with one another as good neighbors.
45.	In 1972 alone, the United States and the Soviet Union have undertaken with each other to do their utmost to avoid military confrontations, to respect the sovereign equality of all countries and to promote conditions in which no country would be subject to outside interference in its internal affairs. The Soviet Union and the United States have also placed precise limitations on our defensive and, at least for the next five years, on our offensive strategic missile systems. The United States and the People's Republic of China have undertaken to broaden the understanding between our peoples, to improve relations between us in the conviction that this would be in the interests of all States, and to oppose any efforts to establish hegemony in Asia or toward division of the world into spheres of influence. The United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed on specific provisions to ensure unimpeded movement to and from Berlin by road, rail and waterways. The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have opened negotiations on a treaty to normalize their relations. And North and South Korea have intensified their talks on the plight of divided families and have agreed to establish a joint committee to examine problems of unification.
46.	There have been many other accomplishments in pursuance of the Charter's objectives in 1972. I mention these merely to illustrate how old patterns of hostility are being eroded. If continued, this process will in time find positive reflection within the United Nations itself.
47.	We are encouraged, too, by calls in both Eastern and Western capitals for a more secure and open Europe. A step toward realizing this goal would be the creation of a more stable military balance in central Europe through negotiation of mutual and balanced force reductions. We are currently in consultation with our allies, and we believe exploratory talks on this subject could begin within the next several months. We trust they will be productive.
48.	It is equally important to move toward more normal relationships in Europe relationships which have not existed since the end of the Second World War. Toward this objective, a conference on security and co-operation in Europe, if it is carefully and constructively prepared, could play a crucial role. A conference whose over-all effect was to put a stamp of approval upon the rigid divisions of Europe would only prolong the problems of today into yet another generation. On the other hand, a conference which promoted a more normal relationship among all of Europe's States and peoples would reinforce the trend toward better 
relations on other levels. That is why we believe that the conference must take practical steps to promote the freer movement of people, ideas and goods across the breadth of the continent.
49.	We are also now studying alternative approaches for the forthcoming Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The United States will pursue the following general aims. First, our endeavor will be to negotiate on offensive weapons. In so doing we shall seek to expand the scope of strategic offensive weapons included in the limitations and to establish an equitable balance in the major delivery systems. Second, we shall wish to examine carefully qualitative limitations which could enhance stability. Third, we will aim to reduce levels of strategic arms. As President Nixon said to this General Assembly in 1969, our objective is '.. . not only to limit the build-up of strategic arms, but to reverse it.'
50.	Of course we also attach importance to the work of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has now turned its attention to preventing the accumulation of chemical weapons for use in warfare. Work in that Committee has come a long way towards resolving some of the important and complex issues related to possible significant restraints in this area. The United States is intensifying its study of all proposals and we look forward to responding to them at an early date.
51.	It is clear from what I have said that the United States believes that a practical step-by-step approach is the best way to achieve genuine progress m disarmament.
52.	Let me take note of other areas in the world in which progress needs to be accelerated.
53.	In Africa, this Assembly must continue to champion the efforts of all peoples of all races to secure human dignity, self-determination and social justice. The United States will continue to lend its full support to all practical efforts to those ends.
54.	In Latin America, while growth rates in recent years have far exceeded Alliance for Progress targets, economic development is still a primary concern and a primary need. The United States Government remains committed to a substantial program of economic assistance, particularly through regional organizations. And, in recognition of the importance of trade to development, we are actively supporting the participation of Latin American and other developing countries in the coming negotiations on a new international monetary system.
55.	In Viet-Nam the United States has reduced its armed forces from about 550,000 to 35,000. President Nixon has proposed a cease-fire in all of IndoChina under international supervision, an exchange of prisoners of war, and a total withdrawal of United States forces. Under this proposal the political future of Viet-Nam could be negotiated by the VietNamese themselves. President Nixon has also pledged a major effort to assist both VietNamese States in post-war reconstruction. In such circumstances it is hard to understand why the other side persists in believing that the war should be continued.  
 
56.	And in the Middle East, the momentum towards a peace settlement must be regained. We should take note of two positive elements. First, the cease-fire is now in its twenty-sixth month. Second, the climate for a settlement seemed to improve very much as 1972 progressed. We must, however, recognize that the Munich killings have set off deplorable patterns of action and reaction and I emphasize that the United States believes that both action and reaction are deplorable-and that these patterns have seriously clouded the prospects for early progress. Nevertheless, neither side has permanently closed the door to future diplomatic efforts. We believe that the forces favoring a peaceful settlement still have the upper hand. Our task in this Assembly, our task individually as representatives of nations, is to do everything possible to see that the forces that favor a peaceful settlement are supported.
57.	The 'no war, no peace' situation which prevails now in the Middle East does not and will not serve the interest of anyone in the area. Certainly a stable, just and durable peace agreement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967) continues to be the objective of the United States. But this, we believe, cannot be achieved without the beginning of a genuine negotiating process between the parties concerned. No settlement imposed from the outside can long endure. Negotiation is not capitulation. Negotiating activity among long-standing antagonists across the world is occurring at present. Why should the Middle East be an exception? When North Korea can talk to South Korea, when East Germans can talk to West Germans, when Indians and Pakistanis can meet in the immediate aftermath of war and prior to the withdrawal of troops, then surely the Middle East should be no exception to the general rule that differences should be reconciled through an active dialog between the parties concerned.
58.	Let me hasten to add that we do not hold that the process need necessarily begin through direct negotiations. We understand that other diplomatic avenues exist. Ambassador Jarring remains available to help the parties negotiate the terms of a peace settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
59.	Another-and in our view the most promising-first step would be proximity talks leading to an interim Suez Canal agreement. What would such an agreement do? It would separate the combatants, restore to Egypt operation of and authority over the Suez Canal, involve some Israeli withdrawal, preserve the cease-fire, and provide momentum for further efforts towards an over-all settlement.
60.	It is encouraging that both sides agree that such an interim agreement would be not an end in itself but rather the first step towards an over-all peace settlement. Such a practical test of peace on the ground would be in the interests of both sides, and the United States remains prepared to assist in achieving it, if that would be helpful to the parties. Moreover, an over-all settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) must meet the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Governments on both sides as well as of the Palestinian people.
61.	In considering some of the great political developments of the past few years, one cannot help but observe as the Brazilian Foreign Minister has just done- that the United Nations has not been directly involved. This fact has often been cited in attacks against it.
62.	We are all aware, of course, that the Charter does not intend the United Nations to be the center of all diplomacy. Still, as the Secretary-General puts it temperately in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization, . . in the political sphere the Organization's place is . . . uncertain' [A/8701/Add.l, p. 1]. With that thought most of us would agree.
63.	As we look to the future, it is well to keep in mind that it is not so much in institutional reforms-and we are certainly not opposed to such reforms-as in national wills that the solutions to the problems must be sought. The future of this body, the future of the United Nations, depends on national wills, on the ability of nations to work together, accommodating themselves to each other's problems, if you will. Yet to the extent that better work methods and more realistic institutional arrangements will help, we also must bring them about.
64.	For example, we believe that for the Security Council to maintain its influence and authority, ways must be found to ensure the representation of States, other than the present permanent members and I am speaking about States whose resources and influence are of major importance in world affairs. The absence of Japan, for example, is notable in a body designed to engage the responsibilities of the world's principal Powers.
65.	We believe in greater recourse to fact-finding commissions, to good offices and to quiet preventive diplomacy.
66.	We believe that the increase in bloc voting, often without independent regard for the merits of the issue, is leading increasingly to unrealistic results.
67.	The discussion of the United Nations weaknesses in dealing with political problems has reached its peak just at a time when its contribution to economic development and scientific and technological co-operation is making great strides.
68.	Long before economic development became a major matter of international concern, the United Nations initiated efforts to reduce the economic gap between developed and developing countries. From the start the United States has supported that effort. It is an encouraging fact that during each of the last three years the per capita growth in production has finally achieved a higher rate in the less developed than in the developed world. Still, as the recent World Bank report showed, there are serious problems of income distribution, high rates of infant mortality, low rates of literacy, serious malnutrition and widespread ill health.  The United States intends to continue to devote serious efforts to solving such problems through the improved United Nations Development Program, and through other channels of economic assistance. 
69.	United Nations activities related to science and technology are also having an impact.
70.	The landmark United Nations Conference on the Human Environment has proposed a world monitoring of levels of pollution in water, air, earth and living beings, measuring levels of specific chemicals, such as hydrocarbons which poison the air of the world's cities. To launch this and other important programs without delay, we urge this Assembly to establish the secretariat and the proposed $100 million fund for the environment.
71.	The United Nations can also make a substantial contribution in the fight against drug traffic, particularly heroin traffic. A revised Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs will give the International Narcotics Control Board authority to reduce poppy cultivation and opium production in countries shown to be sources of that traffic. The United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control is helping States to improve their drug administrations, to train police and customs officials, to develop other means of livelihood for opium farmers, and to prevent and treat drug addiction. As President Nixon said last week, “Every Government which wants to move against narcotics should know that it can count on our country for our wholehearted support and assistance in doing so'.
72.	Just last week the Secretary-General announced that 1974 will be the World Population Year and the time, of a major United Nations population conference. It is our hope that the conference will lead to the setting of concrete goals of reduced population growth.
73.	The General Assembly at this session will review the progress of its sea-bed Committee? in preparing for a conference on the law of the sea [item 36]. It is important for us to use this opportunity to help make the oceans an example of international co-operation rather than an area of future conflict.
74.	Such activities as pollution, narcotics, the sea-bed and population control-most of them connected with new applications of science and technology will increase in importance in the future. We believe that they must acquire a greater focus and priority in the United Nations.
75.	I have spoken today about some of the United Nations weaknesses as well as some of its strengths because I believe we must look at this Organization realistically so that we may contribute to its future prospects. In that spirit, the United States will continue to support the United Nations. We remain committed to making it stronger and more effective.
76.	During this session the United Nations will have an opportunity and an obligation to take action of vital importance to the international community. The United Nations must deal effectively with criminal acts of international terrorism which have so tragically touched the lives of people everywhere, without warning, without discrimination, without regard for the sanctity of human life. 
77.	Twenty-four years ago the United Nations, in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights, affirmed that every human being has the right to 'life, liberty, and the security of person'. Yet what is happening in the world today to that security?
78.	In Sweden, 90 people boarding an international flight are held hostage and held for ransom by Croatian terrorists.
79.	In London an Israeli diplomat is killed by a bomb sent through the mail. In New York colleagues in the United Nations narrowly avert a similar fate.
80.	In Cyprus 95 persons of many nationalities narrowly escape death on a Venezuelan plane when a bomb is discovered just in time.
81.	In New York shots are fired into the apartment of a member of the Soviet mission where children are playing.
82.	In Munich 11 Olympic athletes are kidnapped and murdered in a day of horror witnessed throughout the world.
83.	In Czechoslovakia a Czechoslovak pilot is killed and his plane hijacked and diverted to West Germany.
84.	In Israel 26 tourists, 16 of them American citizens, are slaughtered in an insane attack at an international airport.
85.	In this year alone 25 airliners from 13 countries have been successfully hijacked, and 26 other attempts have been frustrated. In this year alone 140 airplane passengers and crew have been killed-140 have been killed-and 97 wounded in acts of terrorism. In five years 27 diplomats from 11 countries have been kidnapped and three assassinated. In New York, Arab and other missions have been threatened with violence.
86.	Is there anyone here in this Assembly who has not had the occasion, as he has journeyed by plane from around the globe, to be concerned about his own personal safety? Is there any one of you here who has not wondered what terrorist might strike next, or where he might strike?
87.	The issue is not an issue of war-not war between States, not civil war or revolutionary war. The issue is not the strivings of people to achieve self-determination and independence. Rather, it is whether millions of air travelers can continue to fly in safety each year. It is whether a person who opens his mail can open it without fear of being blown up. It is whether diplomats can safely carry out their duties. It is whether international meetings, like the Olympics, like this General Assembly, can proceed without the ever-present threat of violence. In short, the issue is whether the vulnerable lines of international communications the airways and the mails, diplomatic discourse and international meetings can continue, without occupation, to bring nations and peoples together. All who have a stake in this have a stake in decisive action to suppress these demented acts of terrorism.
88.	We are all aware that, aside from the psychotic and the purely felonious, many criminal acts of terrorism derive from political origins. We all recognize that issues such as self-determination must continue to be addressed seriously by the international community. But political passion, however deeply held, cannot be a justification for criminal violence against innocent persons. Certainly the terrorist acts I have cited are totally unacceptable attacks against the very fabric of international order. They must be universally condemned, whether we consider the cause the terrorists invoke noble or ignoble, legitimate or illegitimate.
89.	We must take effective steps to prevent the hijacking of international civil aircraft.
90.	We must take effective steps to prevent murderous attacks and the kidnapping of diplomats.
91.	We must take effective steps to prevent terrorists from sending bombs through the mails, or murdering innocent civilians. Just a few hours ago, I am pleased to note, the International Criminal Police Organization [INTERPOL], by a vote of 58 to none, condemned such acts and decided to gear up its machinery to help cope with this very difficult problem.
92.	The United States welcomes the initiative the Secretary-General has taken to place this matter on the agenda [A/8791 and Add.l]. Two years ago, before the problem had reached its present dimensions, the General Assembly took the first step, the step that must guide us now. In the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV), annex], which so strongly-keep this in mind reaffirmed the right of self-determination, the General Assembly also unanimously declared that each nation has a duty to refrain from assisting or in any way participating in
'... terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts...'
93.	The time has come to make that obligation, which this General Assembly solemnly undertook, more specific and more meaningful. In the past two years the international community has taken certain steps in the field of hijacking. Conventions have been concluded prescribing severe penalties for the hijacking and sabotage of aircraft and requiring States to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs. We urge all States which have not ratified these conventions to do so.
94.	We are now faced with an urgent need to deter and punish international crimes of violence not only in the air but throughout our societies. The United States urges this Assembly to act, and act at once, to meet this challenge.
95.	First, the draft treaty to prosecute or extradite those who attack or kidnap diplomats or officials of foreign governments or international organizations should be completed and opened for signature at this session of the Assembly. The draft articles on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons are already before the Assembly in the report of the International Law Commission [A/8710/Rev.l, chap. II, sect. C]. 
96.	Second, a treaty providing for suspension of all air service to countries which fail to punish or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft should be promptly completed and opened for signature. We repeat that such a treaty should provide for the suspension of all air service to countries which fail to prosecute or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft. It is our view that a nation which provides a safe haven for hijackers should be outlawed by the international community. A draft of a treaty to do this has already been considered by a sub-committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization. To achieve early action, the process of deliberation should be accelerated and a diplomatic conference to complete the treaty should be called without delay.
97.	Third, a new treaty on the export of international terrorism should be concluded and opened for signature as soon as possible. It should include universal condemnation of, and require the prosecution or extradition of, persons who kill, seriously injure or kidnap innocent civilians in a foreign State for the purpose of harming or forcing concessions from a State or from an international organization. To complete such a treaty, we believe a diplomatic conference should be convened as soon as possible. The United States Government is today circulating the first draft of such a treaty.  We urge all governments to give it their earnest consideration. We refer to this as a first draft, because we are sure that many suggestions for changes will be made. We are perfectly flexible on the form of the treaty, but we think this is a subject that deserves our earnest attention.
98.	We have also embodied these various proposals in a draft resolution which we submitted to the Secretariat this morning for distribution. 
99.	These actions would mark a major advance in the struggle against international terrorism. Surely, it is in the collective interest of every nation represented in this hall to arrest the growing assault on international order with which we are all faced. Let this General Assembly be the driving force for the specific and vigorous steps that are required. Let it prove that the United Nations can meet this test. Let it show people everywhere that this Organization, here, now, is capable of the concrete action necessary to bring us closer to a world free of violence-the kind of world which is the great goal of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. President, the Canadian delegation looks forward with hope and determination to the proceedings of the twenty-seventh session, over which you will preside. We count upon you for that same wisdom and judgment which characterized your distinguished predecessor's term of office. Your election is a mark of our high regard for you and for your country. Poland symbolizes for the world the unquenchable flame of national will blazing out after centuries of darkness. We remember that the terrible war which brought this Organization into existence began in the defense of Poland's national independence. We remember, too, the debt every country in the world not least my own owes to the Polish people in all the arts of civilization. How fitting it is, Mr. President, that the year of your election should be the five hundredth anniversary of the birth of that towering genius, Nicolaus Copernicus, to whom all mankind stands debtor.
23.	May I welcome you also, Mr. Secretary-General, to the indispensable duties upon which you have embarked so vigorously. With the whole world as your province, you have already traveled widely. Canada was honored by one of your first visits as Secretary-General, as it was some years ago by your first appointment as ambassador of your country.
24.	Your concern for both the authority and the efficiency of the United Nations has been evident from the outset in the measures you have taken to assert the one and enhance the other. You have our admiration and our support. It is a current commonplace to take a dark view of the performance and prospects of the United Nations. One respected international commentator observed just the other day that 'the United Nations has never been weaker than it is now', while your predecessor, Mr. Secretary- General, has called the phase through which the Organization is now passing 'a time of trials'.
25.	There is ample evidence to justify a sense of defeatism. The international community often seems incapable of preventing war, powerless in the face of acts of terrorism, apathetic at the spectacle of starvation and misery, and irresponsible in its willingness to risk permanent damage to the environment. We seek to explain this by observing that in a world of sovereign nation-States, the United Nations is bound to reflect the weaknesses of the international society which produced it. Time and again, national egotism seems to be the ruling principle of that society.
26.	This is at the root of the world's deep anxiety. For the better part of this century, we have known that nationalism has imperfections. Yet mankind is not about to do away with sovereign States. Indeed, the events of the century, by breaking up old empires and multiplying new sovereignties, have acted as a stimulus to nationalism. New States are not willing to deny themselves the advantages they believe older States have gained from national independence. Certain great tasks of social and economic construction are indeed impossible except in conditions of independence and, while some advantages of independence may prove illusory, even this is irrelevant since the Charter establishes national sovereignty as a fundamental principle.
27.	Those are powerful considerations. In the face of them, it is unrealistic to plan for an international order in which the system based upon sovereign national units has been replaced. Instead, it is more hopeful and more sensible to work to transform the existing system, encouraging it when necessary to produce the antidote to its own poisons.
28: There have been encouraging developments in this sense recently. Even in the brief space of time since last we met, relationships between the great Powers have undergone' a remarkable transformation. Earlier this year, the two nuclear super-Powers signed a declaration on basic principles governing their relations,  an agreement limiting anti-ballistic missile systems,  and an interim agreement on the limitation of strategic arms.  Furthermore, the Soviet Union and the United States have reaffirmed the undertaking in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] to pursue their negotiations to end the nuclear arms race and bring about actual measures of nuclear disarmament.2 The nuclear sponsors of the non-proliferation Treaty have a particular responsibility to adopt measures to curtail the nuclear arms race and thereby prevent further nuclear proliferation. One such measure would be a ban on all nuclear testing. Surely it is time for the two super-Powers to end underground tests, for the two States which continue to test in the atmosphere to cease their testing, and for a complete test ban to be concluded.
29.	The international community has a right to expect that the agreements concluded in Moscow will open the way to more far-reaching nuclear arms control and disarmament measures. But it by no means under-estimates the historic significance of what has already been accomplished. Surely this amounts to a recognition that the search for a one-sided strategic advantage has become self-defeating and illusory and that the way ahead lies through a stabilized nuclear balance to nuclear disarmament itself.
30.	In this same brief space of time to which I have referred, the People's Republic of China has, to Canada's great satisfaction, taken its rightful place in the United Nations. Relations between China and the United States and between China and Japan have witnessed a dramatic improvement. In Europe, breeding-ground of two world wars, the most significant steps in this generation have been taken to reconstruct relations between the Federal Republic of Germany on the one hand and the German Democratic Republic, Poland and the Soviet Union on the other. The first general negotiations on co-operation and security in Europe since before the Second World War, as well as negotiations to bring about a mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Europe, will soon begin.
31.	Caution says of course that all these developments are only beginnings. But they could mark the greatest change in the international order since the United Nations was founded. If we are right to say that the United Nations reflects the international order on which it is based, can we be wrong to hope that these beginnings will sooner or later transform the United Nations as well? There are other hopeful developments. Dialogs have now begun between the two halves of Germany and Korea. These face enormous difficulties. But we can expect that in the not-too- distant future the universality of the United Nations will be strengthened through the extension of membership to the peoples of the divided countries. It will be strengthened also as self-determination brings the era of colonial empires to its final end, especially in Africa, where the most intractable problems of securing human dignity and freedom are posed. Although the recent proceedings of the Security Council give little support to the view, surely it is no longer visionary to conceive of situations in which the Council will function as was originally intended, by consensus of the permanent members and of the United Nations as a whole, through co-operation rather than through confrontation.
32.	We founded the United Nations, as the Charter says, 'to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war'. More has been accomplished in this past year to remove that danger than in any year since this Organization was created. Certainly so far as the risk of a general nuclear war is concerned, the hopeful evolution of great-Power relationships evokes deep feelings of relief, gratitude and satisfaction from us all.
33.	It would be a bitter irony if the safer, saner world which seems at last a possibility rather than a dream should turn instead into a world in which the stream of violence simply cuts new channels.
34.	Time and again, the smaller countries have called for an end to the nuclear arms race, an end to nuclear confrontation. We have sought an international order in which the great Powers conceived it neither as to their interest nor as their obligation to police the world. Now the great Powers, in their own interest and in the interest of us all, are moving in this direction. Is the new security and freedom which will thereby be available to all countries, large and small, to be dissipated in new forms of violence? Must we admit that only the fear of nuclear escalation has allowed us some limited success in the past generation in controlling recourse to force? Yet the international community still has no answer to the dilemma of deciding at what point local violence has such wide and obvious international implications that it can no longer be accepted as a purely domestic matter. We struggled with this problem last year during the crisis in Bangladesh. Even where violence is plainly international from the outset, our means of dealing with it are often pitifully weak. There are those in the world who appear to believe that the norms of civilized international life are not for them. They consider that they have a right to pursue their grievances by kidnapping, piracy, murder and wholesale terror and violence.
35.	The problem is growing. It has become world-wide. My own country has had its tragic experience of violence of this sort. Canadians instinctively share the horror and shock which these acts produce wherever in the world they may occur. The Canadian Government understands only too well the agonizing choices Governments face when called upon to deal with a sudden nightmare of violence.
36.	Terrorism takes many forms. It is called forth by a wide range of complex situations. The rights and wrongs of these situations are bitterly contested. It is simple realism to recognize all this. But the problem cannot be ignored because it is difficult. There must be no truce with terror. Some acts of terror are the work of deluded and demented criminals, others of frustrated and desperate men willing to sacrifice their own lives and the lives of innocent people in what they regard as a noble cause. When we agree that the cause is noble, we are tempted to condone the terror. But are we wise to do so? The act we condone today may be the one we regret tomorrow, when it is turned against us, for terrorism in the end affects everyone: it is an attack on civilization at large. Violence breeds violence, murder answers murder, and order dissolves in chaos.
37.	Therefore, we approve the Secretary-General's initiative in seeking to have the subject placed on the agenda [A/8791 and Add.lJ. A number of delegations have reservations about the debate upon which the Assembly is to enter. Some fear it will be too diffuse to be useful; others that it will be too narrow to be constructive. It need be neither. The Canadian delegation looks upon the debate as a way to focus international concern upon the whole range of acts of terror and to stimulate action both by international bodies such as the International Civil Aviation Organization and the International Red Cross and by Governments acting within their o vn powers or under bilateral agreements.
38.	The means of dealing with the problem will be as varied as its forms. Some international legal instruments already exist for the purpose. Those should be quickly strengthened through ratification by as many States as possible. Perhaps new international machinery and new international legal instruments will be necessary as well. Then let us create them. How can the world, which has declared slavery, piracy and the drug traffic beyond the pale of civilized life, fail to outlaw terrorism? The Canadian Government, which has already amended its domestic law, entered into bilateral negotiations to limit terrorism in the form of hijacking and ratified the international conventions concerned, stands ready to contribute to the strengthening of international law to outlaw terror.
39.	The task is formidable. But the United Nations has responded to challenges of equal difficulty in the past. Since we cannot expect national loyalties to disappear, we must work to temper those loyalties by a growing sense of responsibility on the part of individuals and Governments to the international community at large. I suggest that a consciousness of this responsibility is growing in ways unknown to previous generations.
40.	Consider the field of human rights. It would be easy to multiply examples of violations of human rights throughout the world. The task of creating and ensuring respect for agreed international standards ha^ been daunting. Deep historic and cultural differences have produced widely differing views of the true source and proper extent of individual rights. Those differences are profound. How can we legislate them out of existence? Yet and I would draw this to the Assembly's attention the international community has successfully legislated the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex]. In doing so, it has recognized that there are limits to the exercise of State sovereignty and that certain rights attach to individuals among others, the rights to life and freedom, to liberty and personal security, to fair and prompt justice, to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and the right to leave any country, including one's own.
41.	The task now is to ensure that these rights are honored in practice. So far as my country is concerned, I am glad to say that the constitutional difficulties which have delayed Canadian ratification of the human rights Covenants are well on the way to being overcome. Through national experience and international example, Canadians have come to appreciate that the field of human rights is another sphere in which national and international obligations reinforce each other.
42.	Among the most serious challenges to the honoring of human rights today are those that lie in Africa. In South Africa the very system of apartheid does violence to the concepts embodied by the international community in the two Covenants on human rights. In Rhodesia an illegal regime continues to deny the majority of its citizens even the hope of the basic rights to which they are entitled, and now, in Uganda, a new form of danger has arisen. I do not wish to enter into the substance of the question. Obviously, however, the situation in Uganda requires the exercise of the greatest restraint on the part of the Ugandan Government if the Asian community is to be allowed to leave in conditions of reasonable dignity and security. Humanity on the part of other Governments is required as well, so that the tens of thousands who may ultimately be affected by enforced expulsion may have a generous reception in the many countries of the world where their talents could find new and useful expression.
43.	The great programs for economic co-operation' between the developing and the industrialized world are another instance in which a growing sense of obligation to the international community has become an expression of enlightened nationalism. The whole notion that this world venture should be undertaken at all has become part of general public consciousness only in the last 20 years. And once again those who are looking for reasons to be discouraged after a relatively brief effort find their case ready made. From the statistics of the first United Nations Development Decade we know that per capita incomes in the developed countries-already far higher than in the third world have been growing at not much less than twice the rate of incomes in the developing countries. We know that in the developed countries the consumption of energy per capita is 5 to 10 times the world average and that, quite apart from the difference in protein content, the intake of food in calories is almost twice as much per capita as in the developing world.
44.	Those gaps are great. Some of them are growing. Meanwhile, the efforts of the developing countries to strengthen their economies are partially absorbed in supporting populations which in Asia, Africa and Latin America are growing at the rate of between 2 and 3 per cent a year-double or more the rate for Europe and North America.
45.	The resources devoted to attacking these problems of development and disparity are undeniably inadequate. If they are to be increased in quantity and quality the developing countries must continue their heroic efforts while the developed world finds ways of increasing the measure of its participation. The attack must focus equally on social issues, given the interdependence of social progress and economic growth.
46.	In Canada, I am glad to say, sustained public consciousness of these problems has permitted the Government to make steadily increasing resources available for programs of economic co-operation. I expect this trend to continue. It will be combined with an intensified search to ensure that the co-operation is extended in the forms we are best fitted to provide and our partners are best fitted to use. Hand in hand with this will go measures to improve the terms on which the developing countries have access to our markets.
47.	In economic relations generally, discouragement at some current tendencies would be justified. There is will an inadequate international framework within which to adjust the trading relations of the developed with the developing economies, and the market with the socialist economies. Among the major trading nations there are distressing tendencies towards protectionism, associated in part with the growth of trading blocs.
48.	International monetary machinery labors under extra-ordinary strains and urgently requires strengthening. Yet all these problems are recognized. They are under repeated attack in the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the regional economic commissions and elsewhere, and not without success. In the last analysis a sense of common purpose leads gradually to overcoming national differences.
49.	If we wish to measure our progress we have only to recall the economic chaos of the period between the two world wars. Then rampant nationalism combined with economic ignorance to bring the world economic system down in ruins. How many of the political failures of that period can be traced to economic failures? For all their faults, the present world economic structure and the institutional framework for economic co-operation which has grown up under the United Nations are an infinite improvement.
50.	But perhaps the most dramatic example of the rapid development of an international conscience and a sense of international responsibility concerns the protection of the environment. Even 10 years ago threats to the balance of nature were a matter for specialists. The public generally, and governments generally, were hardly aware that problems existed. In a matter of a few years we have awakened to the risk that we may be doing irreversible harm to the** natural order which sustains life upon the planet.
51.	The United Nations Conference on the Human Environment was the world community's first response to that challenge. It will undoubtedly take its place as one of the major conferences in United Nations history. Through its Declaration  the Conference has established a kind of 'environment charter', providing a sound basis for the development of international environmental law and other co-operative measures for the protection and enhancement of the human environment. The recommendations for action agreed to by the Conference  demonstrate the willingness of Governments to work towards that goal. The endorsement of those recommendations consistent with the spirit and sense of purpose displayed in the Declaration will, in the Canadian view, be one of the major achievements of this Assembly, for the Stockholm Conference enunciated'.fundamental principles of international environ-mental law.
52.	The international community now has an opportunity to make a further advance in strengthening the international legal regime as it affects the environment. This is in relation to the law of the sea. Canada, like many other countries, is in favor of convening the third law of the sea conference in 1973, but only if preparations are adequate. This will be possible if the sea-bed Committee  is able to hold two further sessions during 1973. Then the conference could be formally launched with an organizational meeting in the fall of 1973.
53.	Those who wrote the Charter of the United Nations had certain clear ideas about what was needed to preserve international peace and security. They inherited some social, economic and legal machinery, and devised more. But the most foreseeing of them could not have anticipated many of the problems that have preoccupied the United Nations since. The whole range of exercises in peacekeeping; the transition to the post-colonial world; the machinery for economic co-operation between the developed and the developing countries; the extended protection of human rights; the work accomplished in relation to the environment, the sea-bed and outer space all these endeavors have called forth activity unimaginable in 1945.
54.	In a remarkable way this Organization has risen to these demands. It has done so by creating a large and complex family of agencies-so large and complex, indeed, that strong administrative leadership is as crucial to the continued authority of the United Nations as political leadership itself. To ensure that the machinery functions at maximum effectiveness on a sound and equitable financial basis is a problem of the first order. The Canadian delegation will work to ensure that this problem receives the steady attention it deserves. Considerations of cost and complexity are, however, a reminder that a price has to be paid if the United Nations is to be flexible and dynamic.
55.	I contend that it has displayed these qualities. The successive challenges of the last generation have been met with only two changes in the Charter: the increase in the membership of both the Security Council and of the Economic and Social Council. Apart from this, we have built upon the Charter machinery, giving a living interpretation to the Charter itself. While it has been difficult in practice to secure the required degree of agreement to amend the Charter, this does not seem to have prevented the United Nations from keeping up with the times. Canada is ready to look seriously at any specific proposals to amend the Charter or make it work better if these have broad support among Member States. But I am not convinced that a new Charter that could be agreed upon would be better than the Charter written in 1945.
56.	I have struck a hopeful note, and I may be criticized for that, but I am convinced that this is the right perspective. We have to concentrate on the problems of the day. This Assembly will have to concentrate on measures to prevent terrorism, consolidate our first advance in the environmental field, secure administrative and budgetary reform, protect human rights in Africa and elsewhere, and develop international law, especially the law of the sea and the law governing air piracy. Meanwhile the Security Council may well be obliged to deal with threats to peace-for example, if the current tension in the Middle East rises dangerously. All these matters are sources of deep concern. To deal with them successfully to deal with them at all-will, we know, lead us at times into anger, frustration and despair.
57.	It is therefore a healthy corrective to lift our heads above these problems on occasion, to remind ourselves of the great work the United Nations has accomplished in the past and to seek to trace those currents in human affairs which give hope chat its greatest accomplishments lie ahead.
It is a 
great honour for me, as Prime Minister of Canada, to 
 
 
21 06-52988 
 
speak to the Assembly today about the important issues 
confronting us as Members of the United Nations. 
(spoke in English) 
 The United Nations was born from a combination 
of the essential needs of nations for stability and 
security and the higher ideals to which we should all 
aspire — freedom, democracy, human rights and the 
rule of law. 
(spoke in French) 
 Our responsibilities in this Organization are as 
varied as they are important, and I cannot mention 
them all, nor do each the justice they deserve. 
(spoke in English) 
 Nor can Canada be effective by diffusing our 
efforts across all of these matters. We must focus our 
considerable, but limited, resources where we can 
make a real difference. So let me turn to one particular 
and key area where global interests and higher purpose 
come directly together: the United Nations Assistance 
Mission in Afghanistan. 
 The United Nations recognized shortly after the 
attacks of 11 September 2001 that the Taliban regime, 
by its promotion of terrorism, was a threat to 
international peace and security. 
(spoke in French) 
 Kofi Annan, our Secretary-General, whom we 
thank for his 10 years of loyal service, summed up in a 
few words the reason why we must combat terrorism. 
Terrorism, he said: 
 “is a direct attack on the core values the United 
Nations stands for: the rule of law; the protection 
of civilians; mutual respect between people of 
different faiths and cultures; and peaceful 
resolution of conflicts.” 
(spoke in English) 
 That is why we in the United Nations have the 
responsibility to defeat terrorism. That is why, with 
unity and determination, the United Nations undertook 
its responsibility and its role in Afghanistan. And that 
is why Canada, which lost 24 of its own citizens on 
9/11, answered the call. 
 And there we are. The United Nations Assistance 
Mission in Afghanistan is the United Nations single 
largest political mission. It is also, by far, Canada’s 
biggest and most important overseas mission. So the 
United Nations mission is Canada’s mission. 
 No fewer than 19 United Nations agencies are in 
Afghanistan. They are working tirelessly to help the 
Afghan people and their national Government shake 
off the perpetrators of terrorism and build a democratic 
and secure society. 
 At the same time, approximately 20,000 troops 
from 37 countries — roughly 2,500 Canadians 
included — are contributing to military efforts to help 
stabilize Afghanistan and eliminate the remnants of the 
Taliban regime. And we want to do that once and for 
all. 
(spoke in French) 
 All our actions in Afghanistan — civilian and 
military — are being taken in accordance with the 
mandate of the Security Council. In short, we all stand 
together with the democratically elected Government 
of Afghanistan under the banner of the Organization 
that represents our collective will. In Afghanistan the 
United Nations mission is Canada’s mission. 
(spoke in English) 
 Let us be realistic. The challenges facing 
Afghanistan are enormous. There will be no quick 
fixes. Moreover, success cannot be assured by military 
means alone. This we all recognize. For success also 
requires a strong and unwavering civilian contribution: 
educators, engineers, elections advisers, direct and 
technical aid. The list is lengthy, but the contributions 
are essential. 
 That is why Canada is engaged in work like the 
rebuilding of girls’ schools, ripped down and destroyed 
by the Taliban in their frenzy of hate. 
(spoke in French) 
 That is why last spring we increased our 
development assistance, raising Canada’s total 
contribution to nearly $1 billion over 10 years, to assist 
the people of Afghanistan. 
(spoke in English) 
 These two actions — rebuilding a shattered 
society and providing a stable security environment — 
go hand in glove. And we are making progress — of 
that there is no doubt: 5 million refugees repatriated; 
over 5 million children enrolled in primary schools;  
  
 
06-52988 22 
 
10 million Afghans registered to vote in successive 
democratic elections. 
 More than one quarter of the seats in 
Afghanistan’s legislature are now held by women — 
remarkable in a nation where a few short years ago 
girls could not attend school and women had no human 
rights of any kind. 
 The success of this Mission, in providing both 
security and development, is vital to the safety, 
livelihood and very future of the Afghan people, but it 
is also vital to the health and future of this 
Organization. 
(spoke in French) 
 Let us recall that the democratically elected 
Government of Afghanistan, led by President Karzai, 
requested the assistance of the United Nations and its 
Member States in the struggle against terror, 
intimidation, violence and oppression. 
(spoke in English) 
 We have responded. But we have not made 
Afghanistan’s progress irreversible — not yet. 
Canadian defence personnel, diplomats and 
development officers are on the front lines of the fight 
for the future of Afghanistan. Canadians feel 
tremendous pride in the leadership role they have 
assumed, and we share equal grief for the casualties 
they have taken. We are therefore acutely aware that 
the United Nations job in Afghanistan is not yet done. 
We have no illusions about the difficulties that still lie 
before us. Difficulties do not daunt us. But lack of 
common purpose and will in this body would. 
 After all, if we fail the Afghan people, we will be 
failing ourselves. For this is the United Nations 
strongest Mission and therefore our greatest test. Our 
collective will and credibility are being judged. We 
cannot afford to fail. We will succeed. 
(spoke in French) 
 The United Nations is also facing other 
challenges — in Haiti, for example. Canada has played 
an important role there, dispatching troops, police and 
development officers to support United Nations 
activities aimed at restoring stability and establishing 
democracy. And we are offering the country  
$100 million in economic development assistance. 
However, we must act together to ensure that our 
multinational force paves the way for stability and 
progress, and empowers the Government of Haiti to 
help its citizens, the poorest in the western hemisphere. 
(spoke in English) 
 Darfur, too, is a significant challenge, as 
multinational security efforts are transferred from the 
African Union to the United Nations. It is also a test of 
the principle that this body endorsed last year — the 
responsibility to protect. The United Nations has 
authorized a mission there, with a robust mandate. But 
will the Government of Sudan accept it? 
 In the Middle East, Canada has joined the 
international community in the reconstruction of 
Lebanon. But will the United Nations Interim Force in 
Lebanon ensure security on Israel’s northern border 
and lead to progress in the Middle East peace process? 
 Nuclear proliferation threatens us all. Are we 
prepared to ensure that Security Council decisions will 
be implemented fully? Will we act to halt activities that 
have no reasonable purpose other than the acquisition 
of nuclear weapons? 
 These are some of the tests the whole world must 
face. And there are other challenges internal to this 
Organization. 
 Will the new Human Rights Council become a 
forum where human rights are genuinely put above 
political maneuvering? Or will it emulate the fate of its 
failed predecessor organization? I must say that the 
early signals suggest that too little has changed and 
that the page has not yet been turned. 
 And what will be done to make progress on 
United Nations management reform? 
(spoke in French) 
 Earlier this year Canada’s new Government was 
given a mandate to make our national Government 
more accountable and more responsible, to ensure that 
taxpayers get full value for their money and to pursue a 
clear, focused agenda that produces tangible results. 
The United Nations should accept nothing less. 
(spoke in English) 
 This Organization must become more 
accountable and more effective. Management reform 
must continue, and at an accelerated pace. The 
taxpayers of Member nations, Canadians among them, 
make significant financial contributions to this 
Organization. They have the right to expect stronger, 
 
 
23 06-52988 
 
more independent oversight mechanisms, more robust 
accountability for how funds are spent, and human 
resources practices that are based on merit. 
(spoke in French) 
 I have just described the tests by which this 
Organization will be judged. Canada wants this to be a 
positive judgment. We were there when the United 
Nations was founded. Like the other countries, we 
were motivated by a pressing need to establish a new 
international consensus in a world devastated by war. 
And, like the others, we were motivated by our own 
pragmatic interests and noble aspirations for all of 
humanity. More than 60 years later the formula 
remains the same. 
(spoke in English) 
 The challenge has always been the same: to bring 
nations together to build a better world by forging 
consensus on common purposes and by finding the 
political will to translate these into action. 
 When these goals have been achieved, Canada 
has always been with the Organization — through the 
war against fascism, the cold war, dozens of United 
Nations-sponsored peacekeeping missions, and more 
recent multinational military engagements in the 
Balkans and the Persian Gulf. 
 Today Afghanistan leads the list of challenges 
that we face collectively — peacebuilding in a nation 
where there is not yet peace, where progress requires a 
wide range of capabilities undertaken by a wide array 
of our Member States. 
 My earnest hope is that we will say with pride to 
future generations of leaders: We, the United Nations, 
took up that responsibility in Afghanistan, rose to the 
challenge and met it firmly, collectively, successfully. 
In this endeavour, as with the others I have outlined, 
Canada will be there with the Organization at every 
step along the way. I am grateful for the privilege of 
speaking to the General Assembly. 
 Last week, America and the world marked the 
fifth anniversary of the attacks that filled another 
September morning with death and suffering. On that 
terrible day, extremists killed nearly 3,000 innocent 
people, including citizens of dozens of nations 
represented right here in this Hall. Since then, the 
enemies of humanity have continued their campaign of 
murder. Al-Qaida and those inspired by its extremist 
ideology have attacked more than two dozen nations. 
And recently, a different group of extremists 
deliberately provoked a terrible conflict in Lebanon. At 
the start of the twenty-first century, it is clear that the 
world is engaged in a great ideological struggle 
between extremists who use terror as a weapon to 
create fear and moderate people who work for peace. 
 Five years ago, I stood at this rostrum and called 
on the community of nations to defend civilization and 
build a more hopeful future. This is still the great 
challenge of our time. It is the calling of our 
generation. This morning, I want to speak about the 
more hopeful world that is within our reach — a world 
beyond terror, where ordinary men and women are free 
to determine their own destiny, where the voices of 
moderation are empowered and where the extremists 
are marginalized by the peaceful majority. This world 
can be ours if we seek it and if we work together. 
 The principles of this world beyond terror can be 
found in the very first sentence of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. This document declares 
that the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of 
the human family [are] the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world”. One of the authors of 
this document was a Lebanese diplomat named Charles 
Malik, who would go on to become President of this 
Assembly. Mr. Malik insisted that these principles 
apply equally to all people, of all religions, in all 
regions — including the men and women of the Arab 
world that was his home. 
 In the nearly six decades since that document was 
approved, we have seen the forces of freedom and 
moderation transform entire continents. Sixty years 
after a terrible war, Europe is now whole, free and at 
peace, and Asia has seen freedom progress and 
hundreds of millions of people lifted out of desperate 
poverty. The words of the Universal Declaration are as 
true today as they were when they were written. As 
liberty flourishes, nations grow in tolerance, and hope, 
and peace. And we are seeing the bright future begin to 
take root in the broader Middle East. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East have 
been dramatic, and we see the results in this Hall. Five 
years ago, Afghanistan was ruled by the brutal Taliban 
regime, and its seat in this body was contested. Now 
this seat is held by the freely elected Government of 
Afghanistan, which is represented today by President 
Karzai. Five years ago, Iraq’s seat in this body was 
 
 
9 06-52731 
 
held by a dictator who killed his citizens, invaded his 
neighbours and showed his contempt for the world by 
defying more than a dozen Security Council 
resolutions. Now Iraq’s seat is held by a democratic 
Government that embodies the aspirations of the Iraqi 
people, represented today by President Talabani. With 
these changes, more than 50 million people have been 
given a voice in this Hall for the first time in decades. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East are 
happening gradually, but they are real. Algeria has held 
its first competitive presidential election, and the 
military remained neutral. The United Arab Emirates 
recently announced that half of its seats in the Federal 
National Council will be chosen by elections. Kuwait 
held elections in which women were allowed to vote 
and run for office for the first time. Citizens have voted 
in municipal elections in Saudi Arabia, in 
parliamentary elections in Jordan and Bahrain and in 
multiparty presidential elections in Yemen and in 
Egypt. These are important steps, and the Governments 
should continue to move forward with other reforms 
that show that they trust their people. Every nation that 
travels the road to freedom moves at a different pace, 
and the democracies they build will reflect their own 
cultures and traditions. But the destination is the same: 
a free society where people live at peace with each 
other and at peace with the world. 
 Some have argued that the democratic changes 
we are seeing in the Middle East are destabilizing the 
region. This argument rests on a false assumption: that 
the Middle East was stable to begin with. The reality is 
that the stability we thought we saw in the Middle East 
was a mirage. For decades, millions of men and women 
in the region have been trapped in oppression and 
hopelessness. And these conditions left a generation 
disillusioned and made this region a breeding ground 
for extremism. 
 Imagine what it is like to be a young person 
living in a country that is not moving toward reform. 
You are 21 years old, and while your peers in other 
parts of the world are casting their ballots for the first 
time, you are powerless to change the course of your 
Government. While your peers in other parts of the 
world have received educations that prepare them for 
the opportunities of a global economy, you have been 
fed propaganda and conspiracy theories that blame 
others for your country’s shortcomings. And 
everywhere you turn, you hear extremists who tell you 
that you can escape your misery and regain your 
dignity through violence and terror and martyrdom. For 
many across the broader Middle East, this is the dismal 
choice presented every day. 
 Every civilized nation, including those in the 
Muslim world, must support those in the region who 
are offering a more hopeful alternative. We know that 
when people have a voice in their future they are less 
likely to blow themselves up in suicide attacks. We 
know that when leaders are accountable to their people, 
they are more likely to seek national greatness in the 
achievements of their citizens, rather than in terror and 
conquest. So we must stand with democratic leaders 
and moderate reformers across the broader Middle 
East. We must give voice to the hopes of decent men 
and women who want for their children the same things 
we want for ours. We must seek stability through a free 
and just Middle East where the extremists are 
marginalized by millions of citizens in control of their 
own destinies. 
 Today, I would like to speak directly to the 
people across the broader Middle East. My country 
desires peace. Extremists in your midst spread 
propaganda claiming that the West is engaged in a war 
against Islam. This propaganda is false, and its purpose 
is to confuse you and justify acts of terror. We respect 
Islam, but we will protect our people from those who 
pervert Islam to sow death and destruction. Our goal is 
to help you build a more tolerant and hopeful society 
that honours people of all faiths and promotes peace. 
 To the people of Iraq: nearly 12 million of you 
braved the car bombers and assassins last December to 
vote in free elections. The world saw you hold up 
purple ink-stained fingers, and your courage filled us 
with admiration. You have stood firm in the face of 
horrendous acts of terror and sectarian violence, and 
we will not abandon you in your struggle to build a 
free nation. America and our coalition partners will 
continue to stand with the democratic Government you 
elected. We will continue to help you secure the 
international assistance and investment you need to 
create jobs and opportunity, working with the United 
Nations and through the International Compact with 
Iraq endorsed here in New York yesterday. We will 
continue to train those of you who stepped forward to 
fight the enemies of freedom. We will not yield the 
future of your country to terrorists and extremists. In 
return, your leaders must rise to the challenges your 
country is facing and make difficult choices to bring 
security and prosperity. Working together, we will help 
  
 
06-52731 10 
 
your democracy succeed, so that it can become a 
beacon of hope for millions in the Muslim world. 
 To the people of Afghanistan: together, we 
overthrew the Taliban regime that brought misery into 
your lives and harboured terrorists who brought death 
to the citizens of many nations. Since then, we have 
watched you choose your leaders in free elections and 
build a democratic Government. You can be proud of 
these achievements. We respect your courage and your 
determination to live in peace and freedom. We will 
continue to stand with you to defend your democratic 
gains. 
 Today, forces from more than 40 countries, 
including members of the NATO alliance, are bravely 
serving side by side with you against the extremists 
who want to bring down the free Government you have 
established. We will help you defeat these enemies and 
build a free Afghanistan that will never again oppress 
you or be a safe haven for terrorists. 
 To the people of Lebanon: last year, you inspired 
the world when you came out into the streets to 
demand your independence from Syrian dominance. 
You drove Syrian forces from your country and you 
re-established democracy. Since then, you have been 
tested by the fighting that began with Hizbollah’s 
unprovoked attacks on Israel. Many of you have seen 
your homes and your communities caught in crossfire. 
We see your suffering, and the world is helping you to 
rebuild your country and helping you deal with the 
armed extremists who are undermining your 
democracy by acting as a State within a State. 
 The United Nations has passed a good resolution 
that has authorized an international force, led by 
France and Italy, to help you restore Lebanese 
sovereignty over Lebanese soil. For many years, 
Lebanon was a model of democracy and pluralism and 
openness in the region — and it will be again. 
 To the people of Iran: the United States respects 
you. We respect your country. We admire your rich 
history, your vibrant culture and your many 
contributions to civilization. You deserve an 
opportunity to determine your own future, an economy 
that rewards your intelligence and your talents and a 
society that allows you to fulfil your tremendous 
potential. The greatest obstacle to this future is that 
your rulers have chosen to deny you liberty and to use 
your nation’s resources to fund terrorism, and fuel 
extremism, and pursue nuclear weapons. 
 The United Nations has passed a clear resolution 
requiring that the regime in Tehran meet its 
international obligations. Iran must abandon its nuclear 
weapons ambitions. Despite what the regime tells you, 
we have no objection to Iran’s pursuit of a truly 
peaceful nuclear power programme. We are working 
toward a diplomatic solution to this crisis, and as we 
do, we look to the day when you can live in freedom 
and America and Iran can be good friends and close 
partners in the cause of peace. 
 To the people of Syria: your land is home to a 
great people with a proud tradition of learning and 
commerce. Today your rulers have allowed your 
country to become a crossroad for terrorism. In your 
midst, Hamas and Hizbollah are working to destabilize 
the region, and your Government is turning your 
country into a tool of Iran. This is increasing your 
country’s isolation from the world. Your Government 
must choose a better way forward by ending its support 
for terror, and living in peace with your neighbours, 
and opening the way to a better life for you and your 
families. 
 To the people of Darfur: you have suffered 
unspeakable violence, and my nation has called these 
atrocities what they are: genocide. For the last two 
years, America joined with the international 
community to provide emergency food aid and support 
for an African Union peacekeeping force. Yet your 
suffering continues. The world must step forward to 
provide additional humanitarian aid, and we must 
strengthen the African Union force that has done good 
work but is not strong enough to protect you. The 
Security Council has approved a resolution that would 
transform the African Union force into a blue-helmeted 
force that is larger and more robust. To increase its 
strength and effectiveness, NATO nations should 
provide logistics and other support. The regime in 
Khartoum is stopping the deployment of this force. If 
the Sudanese Government does not approve this 
peacekeeping force quickly, the United Nations must 
act. Your lives and the credibility of the United Nations 
are at stake. So today I am announcing that I am 
naming a presidential Special Envoy — former 
Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, Andrew Natsios — to lead 
America’s efforts to resolve the outstanding disputes 
and help bring peace to your land. 
 The world must also stand up for peace in the 
Holy Land. I am committed to two democratic States, 
 
 
11 06-52731 
 
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and 
security. I am committed to a Palestinian State that has 
territorial integrity and will live peacefully with the 
Jewish State of Israel. This is the vision set forth in the 
road map, and helping the parties to reach this goal is 
one of the great objectives of my presidency. The 
Palestinian people have suffered from decades of 
corruption and violence and the daily humiliation of 
occupation. Israeli citizens have endured brutal acts of 
terrorism and constant fear of attack since the birth of 
their nation. Many brave men and women have made 
the commitment to peace. Yet extremists in the region 
are stirring up hatred and trying to prevent these 
moderate voices from prevailing. 
 This struggle is unfolding in the Palestinian 
territories. Earlier this year, the Palestinian people 
voted in a free election. The leaders of Hamas 
campaigned on a platform of ending corruption and 
improving the lives of the Palestinian people, and they 
prevailed. The world is waiting to see whether the 
Hamas Government will follow through on its 
promises or pursue an extremist agenda. The world has 
sent a clear message to the leaders of Hamas: serve the 
interests of the Palestinian people, abandon terror, 
recognize Israel’s right to exist, honour agreements and 
work for peace. 
 President Abbas is committed to peace and to his 
people’s aspirations for a State of their own. Prime 
Minister Olmert is committed to peace, and has said he 
intends to meet with President Abbas to make real 
progress on the outstanding issues between them. I 
believe that peace can be achieved and that a 
democratic Palestinian State is possible. I hear from 
leaders in the region who want to help. I have directed 
Secretary of State Rice to lead a diplomatic effort to 
engage moderate leaders across the region to help the 
Palestinians reform their security services and support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come 
together to resolve their differences. 
 Prime Minister Blair has indicated that his 
country will work with partners in Europe to help 
strengthen the governing institutions of the Palestinian 
administration. We welcome his initiative. Countries 
like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt have made clear 
that they are willing to contribute the diplomatic and 
financial assistance necessary to help these efforts 
succeed. I am optimistic that, by supporting the forces 
of democracy and moderation, we can help Israelis and 
Palestinians build a more hopeful future and achieve 
the peace in the Holy Land that we all want. 
 Freedom, by its nature, cannot be imposed; it 
must be chosen. From Beirut to Baghdad, people are 
making the choice for freedom. And the nations 
gathered in this Hall must make a choice as well. Will 
we support the moderates and reformers who are 
working for change across the Middle East, or will we 
yield the future to the terrorists and extremists? 
America has made its choice: we will stand with the 
moderates and reformers. 
 Recently, a courageous group of Arab and 
Muslim intellectuals wrote me a letter. In it, they said 
this: “The shore of reform is the only one on which any 
lights appear, even though the journey demands 
courage, patience and perseverance”. The United 
Nations was created to make that journey possible. 
Together we must support the dreams of good and 
decent people who are working to transform a troubled 
region. And by doing so, we will advance the high 
ideals on which this institution was founded. It is an 
honour for me to speak before this Assembly. The 
United Nations is the very embodiment of the 
commitment we have all made to contribute to peace 
and security and to create better living conditions in a 
greater climate of freedom. For its part, the 
Government I represent has never ceased strengthening 
its actions in the international arena. The Canadian 
Government is a responsible partner and a fully 
engaged Power. We are guided by unwavering 
principles. Canada’s commitment is not only linked to 
our interests, but above all to the values that inspire 
Canadians, which are freedom, the rule of law, 
democracy and human rights. They are the values 
underlying our presence in Afghanistan, in Haiti, in the 
Sudan and elsewhere in the world.  
And they are the values and aspirations that are 
embodied in the Preamble to the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights: the inherent dignity and the rights of 
all members of the human family are the foundation of 
freedom, justice and peace. Article 1 of the Declaration 
says further “All human beings are born free and equal 
in dignity and rights”.  
 Those are not abstract concepts. They are real and 
concrete concepts with effects both immediate and 
profound. Promoting them is not enough. They must be 
protected and defended, particularly when they are 
under assault   in Burma, in Afghanistan, in the 
Sudan, in Iran and elsewhere. 
 In Kabul, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has 
confirmed the desire of the United Nations to stabilize 
Afghanistan. Canada has engaged its political 
commitment and practical capabilities to rebuild 
security, democracy, human rights and prosperity in 
that country.  
 Canada believes that a united international 
community must support efforts to rebuild Afghanistan. 
International organizations, including the United 
Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the 
World Bank, must work towards that common goal. No 
one country can do that alone. To fully implement 
Security Council decisions, we must work in close 
partnership, both with the Government of Afghanistan 
and with our friends and allies. 
 To ensure a successful commitment, Canada 
deploys the necessary resources, as with our mission in 
Afghanistan. Under the terms of a clear United Nations 
mandate, Canada joined the coalition of the 
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
More than 60 countries and international organizations 
have undertaken with us to help the democratically 
elected Afghan Government rebuild its country. 
 Canada believes that the efforts of the countries 
and organizations working in Afghanistan are 
commendable and also reflect the core principles 
espoused by the United Nations. The challenge is great, 
but the principles we are defending are greater still. 
 The countries assisting Afghanistan are united by 
a single conviction: there can be no reconstruction 
without security. Democracy and political stability 
cannot flourish in a climate of terror. Health care and 
education cannot be provided where anarchy prevails. 
Economic development is impossible when chaos is all 
around. Security is the crucial foundation on which 
everything depends, but long-term security requires 
sustainable investment in the country’s development; 
one goes hand in hand with the other. 
 Thanks to the assistance of Canada and the 
international community, Afghanistan has made 
progress. Afghan police officers are currently being 
trained, Afghan refugees are returning home and 
Afghan children are learning to read and write. Canada 
is having a real and direct impact on the lives of the 
Afghan people and is contributing to the achievement 
of the vision of the future expressed in the Afghanistan 
Compact which was signed in 2006. In order to make 
that vision a reality, it is crucial that the United Nations 
and the Government of Afghanistan ensure the 
fulfilment of the Compact. And yes, despite the 
incidents of intimidation and violence, the situation of 
the Afghan people is improving.  
 Last year, Prime Minister Harper emphasized 
here that the United Nations Assistance Mission in 
Afghanistan was the most important special political 
mission of the United Nations. The Canadian 
Government continues to support the leadership role of 
the United Nations in Afghanistan. For that reason, 
Canada supports having a new high-level United 
Nations special envoy for Afghanistan. 
 In the past year, our Government has 
demonstrated its multifaceted commitment to that 
mission. We have increased our development spending, 
our diplomatic presence and our military engagement. 
We welcome Security Council resolution 1776 (2007). 
It extends the authorization of the International 
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan and calls on 
Member States to contribute personnel, equipment and 
funding. The Canadian Government encourages 
members of the Assembly to actively support that 
resolution and its implementation. 
 There are other challenges we must also meet. In 
Haiti, the Canadian Government has asked the Security 
Council to extend the mandate of the United Nations 
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. That represents 
Canada’s most substantial development programme 
and its largest stabilization mission in the Americas. 
 In Burma, it is imperative to restore democracy 
and human rights. We expect the United Nations to be 
at the forefront of those efforts. Although we have 
disagreed on occasion with the decisions and processes 
of the United Nations Human Rights Council, the 
convening of a special session of the Human Rights 
Council on Burma is an example of the sort of activism 
and engagement that Canada expects of that body, 
especially in dealing with countries that perpetuate 
human rights violations. 
 In the Sudan, innovative peacekeeping missions 
are creating a security framework which will become 
the foundation upon which a durable peace can be 
built. The international community must demonstrate 
the political will to find new solutions. Those solutions 
must be aimed not only at immediately ending the 
horrific violations of human rights occurring daily in 
Darfur, but also at addressing the issues of freedom and 
democracy that must form the foundation for a durable 
peace. Canada’s substantial contribution to the Sudan 
continues in the form of humanitarian assistance and 
equipment. Of course, we condemn the intolerable 
attack against soldiers of the African Union force. 
 The scope of the challenges we must overcome to 
maintain our security is such that no country can hope 
to tackle them alone. We, the Member States, can and 
must show the determination and political will so that 
the United Nations may truly reflect the principles that 
its founders wanted it to embody. 
 Canada is and will remain a committed partner 
for all those who seek to work for freedom, to work for 
democracy and to work for human rights and the rule 
of law. 
Thank you for the opportunity 
to address the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
 Sixty years ago, representatives from 16 nations 
gathered to begin deliberations on a new international 
bill of rights. The document they produced is called the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and it stands 
as a landmark achievement in the history of human 
liberty. The Declaration opens by recognizing the 
inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of 
all members of the human family as the foundation of 
freedom and justice and peace in the world. As we 
gather for the sixty-second session of the General 
Assembly, the standards of the Declaration must guide 
our work in this world.  
 Achieving the promise of the Declaration requires 
confronting long-term threats. It also requires 
answering the immediate needs of today. 
 We nations in this Hall have our differences. Yet, 
there are some areas where we can all agree. When 
innocent people are trapped in a life of murder and 
fear, the Declaration is not being upheld. When 
millions of children starve to death or perish from a 
mosquito bite, we are not doing our duty in the world. 
When whole societies are cut off from the prosperity of 
the global economy, we are all worse off. Changing 
these underlying conditions is what the Declaration 
calls the work of larger freedom, and it must be the 
work of every nation in this Assembly. 
 This great institution must work for great 
purposes, to free people from tyranny and violence, 
hunger and disease, illiteracy and ignorance and 
poverty and despair. Every member of the United 
Nations must join in this mission of liberation. The 
first mission of the United Nations requires liberating 
people from tyranny and violence. The first article of 
the Universal Declaration begins by stating that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. This truth is denied by terrorists and extremists 
who kill the innocent with the aim of imposing their 
hateful vision on humanity. The followers of this 
violent ideology are a threat to civilized people 
everywhere. All civilized nations must work together 
to stop them by sharing intelligence about their 
networks and choking off their finances and bringing to 
justice their operatives. In the long run, the best way to 
defeat extremists is to defeat their dark ideology with a 
more hopeful vision   the vision of liberty that 
founded this body. 
 The United States salutes the nations that have 
recently taken strides towards liberty, including 
Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone and Morocco. The Palestinian territories 
have moderate leaders   mainstream leaders   who 
are working to build free institutions that fight terror, 
enforce the law and respond to the needs of their 
people. The international community must support 
these leaders so that we can advance the vision of two 
democratic States   Israel and Palestine   living side 
by side in peace and security. 
 Brave citizens in Lebanon and Afghanistan and 
Iraq have made the choice for democracy. Yet, the 
extremists have responded by targeting them for 
murder. This is not a show of strength; it is evidence of 
fear; and the extremists are doing everything within 
their power to bring down these young democracies. 
The people of Lebanon and Afghanistan and Iraq have 
asked for our help, and every civilized nation has a 
responsibility to stand with them. Every civilized 
nation also has a responsibility to stand up for the 
people suffering under dictatorship. In Belarus, North 
Korea, Syria and Iran, brutal regimes deny their people 
the fundamental rights enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration. 
 Americans are outraged by the situation in 
Burma, where a military junta has imposed a 19-year 
reign of fear. Basic freedoms of speech, assembly and 
worship are severely restricted. Ethnic minorities are 
persecuted. Forced child labour, human trafficking and 
rape are common. The regime is holding more than 
1,000 political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, 
whose party was elected overwhelmingly by the 
Burmese people in 1990. 
 The ruling junta remains unyielding, yet the 
people’s desire for freedom is unmistakable. This 
morning, I am announcing a series of steps to help 
bring peaceful change to Burma. The United States will 
tighten economic sanctions on the leaders of the 
regime and their financial backers. We will impose an 
expanded visa ban on those responsible for the most 
egregious violations of human rights   as well as their 
family members. We will continue to support the 
efforts of humanitarian groups working to alleviate 
suffering in Burma. And I urge the United Nations and 
all nations to use their diplomatic and economic 
leverage to help the Burmese people reclaim their 
freedom. 
 In Cuba, the long rule of a cruel dictator is 
nearing its end. The Cuban people are ready for their 
freedom. And as that nation enters a period of 
transition, the United Nations must insist on free 
speech, free assembly and, ultimately, free and 
competitive elections. 
 In Zimbabwe, ordinary citizens suffer under a 
tyrannical regime. The Government has cracked down 
on peaceful calls for reform and has forced millions to 
flee their homeland. The behaviour of the Mugabe 
regime is an assault on its people and an affront to the 
principles of the Universal Declaration. The United 
Nations must insist on change in Harare and must insist 
on freedom for the people of Zimbabwe. 
 In Sudan, innocent civilians are suffering 
repression; and in the Darfur region, many are losing 
their lives to genocide. America has responded with 
tough sanctions against those responsible for the 
violence. We have provided more than $2 billion in 
humanitarian and peacekeeping aid. I look forward to 
attending a Security Council meeting that will focus on 
Darfur, chaired by the French President. I appreciate 
France’s leadership in helping to stabilize Sudan’s 
neighbours. The United Nations must answer this 
challenge to conscience and live up to its promise to 
promptly deploy peacekeeping forces to Darfur. 
 Secondly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from hunger and disease. 
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and of his 
family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical 
care. Around the world, the United Nations is carrying 
out noble efforts to live up to these words. 
 Feeding the hungry has long been a special 
calling for my nation. Today, more than half the 
world’s food assistance comes from America. We send 
emergency food stocks to starving people, from camps 
in Sudan to slums around the world. I have proposed 
an innovative initiative to alleviate hunger under which 
America would purchase the crops of local farmers in 
Africa and elsewhere, rather than shipping in food 
from the developed world. This would help build up 
local agriculture and break the cycle of famine in the 
developing world, and I urge our United States 
Congress to support this initiative. 
 Many in this Hall are bringing the spirit of 
generosity to fighting HIV/AIDS and malaria. Five 
years ago, in sub-Saharan Africa, an AIDS diagnosis 
was widely considered a death sentence, and fewer 
than 50,000 people infected with the virus were 
receiving treatment. The world responded by creating 
the Global Fund, which is working with Governments 
and the private sector to fight the disease around the 
world. The United States decided to take these efforts a 
step further by launching the $15 billion Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief. Since 2003, this effort has 
helped bring cutting-edge medicines to more than a 
million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It is a good start. 
So earlier this year, I proposed to double our initial 
commitment   to $30 billion. By coming together, the 
world can turn the tide against HIV/AIDS, once and for 
all. 
 Malaria is another common killer. In some 
countries, malaria takes as many lives as HIV/AIDS, 
the vast majority of them children under the age of 
five. Every one of these deaths is unnecessary, because 
the disease is preventable and treatable. The world 
knows what it takes to stop malaria   bed nets, indoor 
spraying and medicine to treat the disease. Two years 
ago, America launched a $1.2 billion malaria initiative. 
Other nations and the private sector are making vital 
contributions as well. I call on every Member State to 
maintain its focus, to find new ways to join this cause 
and to bring us closer to the day when deaths caused by 
malaria are no more. 
 Thirdly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from the chains of illiteracy 
and ignorance. Article 26 of the Universal Declaration 
states that everyone has the right to education. When 
nations make the investments needed to educate their 
people, the whole world benefits. Better education 
unleashes the talent and potential of citizens and adds 
to the prosperity of all of us. Better education promotes 
better health and greater independence. Better 
education increases the strength of democracy and 
weakens the appeal of violent ideologies. So the United 
States is joining with nations around the world to help 
them provide a better education for their people. 
 A good education starts with good teachers. In 
partnership with other nations, America has helped 
train more than 600,000 teachers and administrators. A 
good education requires good textbooks. So, in 
partnership with other nations, America has distributed 
tens of millions of textbooks. A good education 
requires access to good schools. So, in partnership with 
other nations, America is helping nations raise 
standards in their schools at home and providing 
scholarships to help students come to schools in the 
United States. And in all our education efforts, our 
nation is working to expand access for women and 
girls so that the opportunity to get a decent education is 
open to all. 
 Finally, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from poverty and despair. 
Article 23 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment and to just and favourable conditions of 
work. In the twenty-first century, this requires ensuring 
that people in poor countries have the same 
opportunity to benefit from the global economy that 
citizens of wealthy countries have. 
 The United Nations provides vital economic 
assistance designed to help developing nations grow 
their economies and reach their potential. The United 
States agrees with that position. We have dramatically 
increased our own development assistance, and we are 
delivering that aid in innovative ways. We started the 
Millennium Challenge Account to reward nations that 
govern justly, fight corruption, invest in their people 
and promote economic freedom. With this aid, we are 
reaching out to developing nations in partnership, not 
paternalism. And we are ensuring that our aid dollars 
reach those who need them and achieve results. 
 In the long run, the best way to lift people out of 
poverty is through trade and investment. A nation that 
is open and trading with the world will create 
economic rewards that far exceed anything it could get 
through foreign aid. During the 1990s, developing 
nations that significantly lowered tariffs saw their per 
capita income grow about three times faster than other 
developing countries. Open markets ignite growth, 
encourage investment, increase transparency, 
strengthen the rule of law and help countries help 
themselves. 
 The international community now has a historic 
chance to open markets around the world by 
concluding a successful Doha Round of trade talks. A 
successful Doha outcome would mean real and 
substantial openings in agriculture, goods and services, 
and real and substantial reductions in trade-distorting 
subsidies. The world’s largest trading nations, 
including major developing countries, have a special 
responsibility to make the tough political decisions to 
reduce trade barriers. America has the wi11 and 
flexibility to make those necessary decisions. Our 
negotiators are demonstrating that spirit in Geneva. I 
urge other leaders to direct their negotiators to do the 
same. And I am optimistic that we can reach a good 
Doha agreement and seize this once-in-a-generation 
opportunity. 
 In the meantime, America wi11 continue to 
pursue agreements that open trade and investment 
wherever we can. We recently signed free-trade 
agreements with Peru, Colombia, Panama and South 
Korea. These agreements embody the values of open 
markets, transparent and fair regulation, respect for 
private property and resolving disputes under rules of 
international law. These are good agreements. They are 
now ready for a congressional vote, and I urge our 
Congress to approve them as soon as possible. 
 As America works with the United Nations to 
alleviate immediate needs, we are also coming together 
to address longer-term challenges. Together, we are 
preparing for pandemics that could cause death and 
suffering on a global scale. Together, we are working 
to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. Together, we are confronting the 
challenges of energy security, environmental quality 
and climate change. I appreciate the discussions on 
climate change led by the Secretary-General last night. 
I look forward to further discussions at the meeting of 
major economies in Washington later this week. 
 The goals I have outlined today cannot be 
achieved overnight, and they cannot be achieved 
without reform of this vital institution. The United 
States is committed to a strong and vibrant United 
Nations. Yet the American people are disappointed by 
the failures of the Human Rights Council. That body 
has been silent on repression by regimes from Havana 
and Caracas to Pyongyang and Tehran, while focusing 
its criticism excessively on Israel. To be credible on 
human rights in the world, the United Nations must 
first reform its own Human Rights Council. 
 Some have also called for reform of the structure 
of the Security Council, including an expansion of its 
membership. The United States is open to this 
prospect. We believe that Japan is well qualified for 
permanent membership on the Security Council and 
that other nations should be considered as well. The 
United States will listen to all good ideas, and we will 
support changes to the Security Council as part of 
broader United Nations reform. And in all we do, I call 
on Member States to work for an institution that 
adheres to strict ethical standards and lives up to the 
high principles of the Universal Declaration. 
 With the commitment and courage of those in this 
Hall, we can build a world where people are free to 
speak, assemble and worship as they wish   a world 
where children in every nation grow up healthy, get a 
decent education and look to the future with hope   a 
world where opportunity crosses every border. America 
will lead towards that vision, in which all are created 
equal and free to pursue their dreams. That is the 
founding conviction of my country. It is the promise 
that established this body. And, with our determination, 
it can be the future of our world.  
﻿It is indeed an honour to
be here in New York City and at the General Assembly.
That we are gathered here now, just two months since
the devastating terrorist attacks of 11 September,
demonstrates both the resilience of this great city and
the determination and defiance of a united global
community.
Having spent last Sunday — like my friend Prime
Minister Dzurinda of Slovakia — running through so
many streets and communities of the five boroughs of
New York City in the annual New York City Marathon,
I have witnessed personally and been quite
overwhelmed by the deep reserves of courage evident
in this city and in all those individuals who are
choosing to take back their lives and reject the menace
of terror.
Our job is to galvanize and to focus the courage
of nations — to transform sentiment into commitment,
and commitment into action. Expressions of a common
outrage are gratifying but they will never be enough to
defeat terrorism. The ultimate success of our
campaign — this long and extremely complex
campaign — rests upon our collective ability to
demonstrate leadership, to harness political will and to
sustain the commitment that we have made to each
other and to our citizens: that we will not allow crimes
so vile, so immense and so shattering to the world to be
unanswered or ever to be repeated.
32

In order to achieve these goals — and to merit the
trust and fulfil the expectations placed in the United
Nations and its constituent Member States — we
cannot go on as before. There can be no more
“business as usual”. There is no more time, there is no
more patience and there are no more resources for
diplomatic gamesmanship and the stoking of dangerous
self-interest. National Governments must take
responsibility and be held accountable for their actions
and decisions — for fighting terrorism, for undertaking
political and legal reforms, for resolving disputes and
for establishing the conditions in which democracy
flourishes and development is sustained.
(spoke in French)
The United Nations is now facing its greatest test
ever since its creation. So far, the United Nations is
performing admirably. The unity of purpose and
effective decision-making that allowed swift passage of
the landmark Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and the rapid convening of a special debate on
terrorism provide clear evidence of what we can
accomplish together, and further underscore the
reasons why this Organization and its esteemed
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, were deservedly
recognized with the Nobel Peace Prize this year.
(spoke in English)
We cannot, however, afford to lose ourselves in
complacency, self-congratulation or distraction. Our
work has only just begun.
Horrific as the atrocities perpetrated on 11
September were, terrorism did not begin here.
Unfortunately, too many of us in this Hall know this all
too painfully. No, it did not begin here; but we as a
global community have the responsibility, and now a
renewed opportunity, to ensure that we end it — here.
The United Nations has a unique and
indispensable role to play. While the campaign against
terrorism will be conducted through coalitions of
different State actors, alliances and organizations, this
is where it must ultimately all come together in its
political, diplomatic, legal, economic, humanitarian
and security dimensions. We in Canada, as long-
standing proponents of multilateralism and the United
Nations system, have strongly welcomed the close
collaboration evident between the United States
Administration and the United Nations over these last
two months.
In Canada, the campaign against terrorism,
including the obligations we have undertaken here at
the United Nations, is our highest priority. Our country,
which shares with the United States the longest
unmilitarized border in the world and the closest, most
extensive and most profitable bilateral relationship
anywhere, has been deeply affected by this crisis.
Canadians, like Americans and citizens of many other
nations, are concerned about their security, but also
about what kind of a country and what kind of a world
they are to live in after 11 September. The interlinked
goals of protecting our citizens, providing assurance to
our partners and allies and preserving the character of
our free, democratic and diverse society have guided
the actions and decisions of Prime Minister Chrétien
and the Canadian Government throughout this crisis.
We have committed 2000 armed forces personnel,
ships, aircraft and special forces to the international
military coalition against terrorism; and at home, we
have introduced a wide range of measures, legislation
and new investments to bolster our security framework,
including at the border and at our airports.
Canada welcomes the reporting and monitoring
functions provided for in Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). We have already implemented many of its
provisions and are moving quickly on the rest. We are
well advanced in the preparation of our report and will
provide it to the Counter-Terrorism Committee well
ahead of the 90-day deadline. We urge other Member
nations to demonstrate their continued resolve and
solidarity by doing likewise. Canada is prepared to
support those States for which implementation poses a
great challenge.
As we take steps in compliance with resolution
1373 (2001), we are completing our ratification of the
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
and the Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, which will make Canada a full
party to all 12 existing United Nations counter-
terrorism conventions. Negotiations are under way on
the thirteenth convention, the comprehensive
convention against international terrorism. That
convention will ensure that all terrorist acts are
condemned under international law. What is needed
now is the political will to complete the negotiations. If
not the General Assembly of the United Nations, then
who? And if not now, then when? The time will never
be more propitious, or the need greater.
33

Our international legal framework also requires a
strong arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament
regime. Implementation of the Ottawa Convention
banning anti-personnel mines is proceeding apace. To
keep weapons of mass destruction from becoming
employed as the instruments of evil, we are also hard at
work to reinforce key instruments such as the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention,
all requiring strong multilateral action to ensure their
full implementation.
I would also add that we are now very close to
making the International Criminal Court a reality, with
only 17 more ratifications to go. The creation of the
Court will represent an extremely significant step in the
ongoing struggle to eliminate impunity for the worst
crimes known to humankind.
These are only the most immediate and most
obvious steps to ensure our collective security, but our
agenda must be far broader than this. Nothing has more
violently shaken our sense of security than have the
events of 11 September. But our conception of what
constitutes security and the nature of the threats that
may be posed to it was already undergoing dramatic
evolution prior to the attacks.
The denial of human rights, the spread of
HIV/AIDS, persistent mass poverty, unchecked
environmental degradation and the blight of drugs and
crime all undermine stability, reduce human potential
and obstruct social and economic progress. They are
threats to human security, as are discrimination and
racism, which the Durban Conference was intended to
address. Unfortunately, it failed to achieve its potential
and instead provided a forum for propagating long-
standing hatreds and biases, and the world is poorer for
that.
The resolution and prevention of conflict must
also remain at the highest order of United Nations
business, but leadership and commitment are required
if we are to move from a culture of reaction to one of
prevention, as proposed by the Secretary-General.
Just a week ago, I ended a five-country visit to
the Middle East. I was reassured by the commitments
of my hosts to the fight against terrorism. As have
others, I urged Israel and the Palestinians to put
immediately into place measures that will bring them
back to the negotiating table. That is their only way
forward. The essential truth is that there is no
alternative to peaceful coexistence. That conflict
cannot go on forever and leaders must act now to bring
it to an end. The international community must also
increase its efforts to help bring about a just peace.
Finally, there is little that is more debilitating to
humankind than the ravages of extreme poverty. This is
most notable in Africa, which will be a principal focus
for the G-8 in 2002, when Canada will assume the G-8
chair. Speaking at this rostrum in 1963, Prime Minister
Lester B. Pearson, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, warned
the world of the dangers of a growing disparity in
economic and social development between nations. He
urged that this “must be corrected before it creates an
unbridgeable gulf between ‘have’ and ‘have-not’
nations” (A/PV.1208, para. 60). That was 38 years ago
and the challenge remains more acute than ever.
The pledges of the Millennium Summit in
September 2000 must not be overshadowed by the
urgency of the events that have taken place one year
later. Indeed, their fulfilment can and must form an
integral component of how we create a strong,
equitable global environment that can be neither
attacked nor exploited by terrorists.
Terrorism does not speak to us; it does not speak
for anyone but criminals and murderers and it only
serves to undermine the causes they purport to
represent. It does not represent Islam; it does not
reflect the will of the Afghan people.
(spoke in French)
The fate of the Afghan people must remain
sharply in our focus. That country has been so
neglected, so abused and so driven into isolation by its
self-appointed rulers that it could not even be ranked
on the most recent United Nations human development
index. The rights of its people — notably women and
girls — have been blatantly and repeatedly violated.
(spoke in English)
An acute humanitarian crisis is building and we
must do more, working with United Nations agencies
and other relief organizations, to ensure that
civilians — including refugees and internally displaced
persons — are protected and have access to food and to
aid.
For this reason, Canada responded to the United
Nations humanitarian appeal, adding further resources
34

to the $160 million in aid that we had already provided
over the last 10 years. We were also pleased at the
prompt appointment of Lakhdar Brahimi — who has
played such an integral role in the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping — as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Afghanistan. Canada has
pledged to work with Ambassador Brahimi and other
coalition States to support the Afghan people in the
search for a stable, fair and effective administration
that can begin the enormous task of leading
Afghanistan forward to a more secure and hopeful
future.
The opportunities for progress towards a more
free, prosperous and peaceful world have always been
before us. In the haze of self-interest and competing
priorities, sometimes our global community has not
seen them so clearly. The enormous horror of 11
September has offered us that clarity, just as it has
concentrated minds and catalysed relationships. It has
given us a renewed basis for cooperation between
States both in and outside the United Nations, driven
not only by the United States and its traditional allies,
including Canada, but also through opportunities for
leadership provided to Russia and China, to India and
Pakistan, to countries of the Middle East, North Africa,
Asia and elsewhere in the resolution of this crisis.
Terrorism globalizes us. It globalizes outrage and
condemnation, just as it does compassion and the cry
for justice. We must ensure that terrorism also
globalizes a sustained commitment to bringing about
its end.
Tomorrow, 11 November, Canada and other
United Nations Member nations will mark our annual
Remembrance Day. On this day, we remember and
honour the men and women who have fought and
sacrificed for our freedom. This week in New York, I
hope that we will all take time to remember what it is
that we are together working — and, yes, fighting —
for today: for freedom, for peace and for justice, and
for the dignity and realization of the potential of all
peoples everywhere.
As we make our speeches, file our papers and
press forward our resolutions in this great Hall, let us
also remember that the words “United Nations” —
coined by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1942 —
not only refer to an Organization or a name on a
building, but were first and foremost a declaration of
solidarity and of a common vision for a better world.





﻿We meet in a Hall devoted to
peace; in a city scarred by violence; in a nation
awakened to danger; in a world uniting for a long
struggle. Every civilized nation here today is resolved
to keep the most basic commitment of civilization. We
will defend ourselves and our future against terror and
lawless violence.
The United Nations was founded in this cause. In
the Second World War, we learned that there is no
isolation from evil. We affirmed that some crimes are
so terrible they offend humanity itself, and we resolved
that the aggressions and ambitions of the wicked must
be opposed early, decisively and collectively, before
they threaten us all.
That evil has returned, and that cause is renewed.
A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a
tomb of rubble. Tomorrow, the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and I will visit that
site, where the names of every nation and region that
lost citizens will be read aloud. If we were to read out
the names of every person who died, it would take
more than three hours.
Those names include a citizen of the Gambia,
whose wife spent their fourth wedding anniversary, 12
September, searching in vain for her husband. Those
names include a man who supported his wife in
Mexico, sending home money every week. Those
names include a young Pakistani who prayed towards
Mecca five times a day and who died that day trying to
save others.
The suffering of 11 September was inflicted on
people of many faiths and many nations. All of the
victims, including Muslims, were killed with equal
indifference and equal satisfaction by the terrorist
leaders.
The terrorists are violating the tenets of every
religion, including the one they invoke. Last week, the
sheikh of Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest
Islamic institution of higher learning, declared that
terrorism is a disease and that Islam prohibits killing
innocent civilians. The terrorists call their cause holy,
yet they fund it with drug dealing. They encourage
murder and suicide in the name of a great faith that
forbids both. They dare to ask God’s blessing as they
set out to kill innocent men, women and children. But
8

the God of Isaac and Ishmael would never answer such
a prayer. And a murderer is not a martyr; he is just a
murderer.
Time is passing. Yet for the United States of
America, there will be no forgetting 11 September. We
will remember every rescuer who died in honour. We
will remember every family that lives in grief. We will
remember the fire and ash, the last phone calls, the
funerals of the children.
And the people of my country will remember
those who have plotted against us. We are learning
their names. We are coming to know their faces. There
is no corner of the Earth distant or dark enough to
protect them. However long it takes, their hour of
justice will come.
Every nation has a stake in this cause. As we
meet, the terrorists are planning more murder —
perhaps in my country, or perhaps, fellow members, in
yours. They kill because they aspire to dominate. They
seek to overthrow Governments and to destabilize
entire regions. Last week, anticipating this meeting of
the General Assembly, they denounced the United
Nations; they called our Secretary-General a criminal
and they condemned all Arab nations here as traitors to
Islam. Few countries meet their exacting standards of
brutality and oppression. Every other country is a
potential target.
And all the world faces the most horrifying
prospect of all: those same terrorists are searching for
weapons of mass destruction, the tools to turn their
hatred into holocaust. They can be expected to use
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons the moment
they are capable of doing so. No hint of conscience
would prevent it. That threat cannot be ignored; that
threat cannot be appeased. Civilization itself — the
civilization we share — is threatened. History will
record our response and will judge or justify every
nation in this Hall.
The civilized world is now responding. We act to
defend ourselves and to deliver our children from a
future of fear. We choose the dignity of life over a
culture of death. We choose lawful change and civil
disagreement over coercion, subversion and chaos.
Those commitments — hope and order, law and life —
unite people across cultures and continents. Upon those
commitments depend all peace and progress. For those
commitments, we are determined to fight.
The United Nations has risen to this
responsibility: on 12 September, these buildings
opened for emergency meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. Before the sun
had set, these attacks on the world stood condemned by
the world, and I want to thank you, fellow members,
for that strong and principled stand.
I also thank the Arab and Islamic countries that
have condemned terrorist murder. Many of you have
seen the destruction of terror in your own lands. The
terrorists are increasingly isolated by their own hatred
and extremism. They cannot hide behind Islam. The
authors of mass murder and their allies have no place
in any culture, and no home in any faith.
The conspiracies of terror are being answered by
an expanding global coalition. Not every nation will be
part of every action against the enemy. But every
nation in our coalition has duties. Those duties can be
demanding, as we in America are learning. We have
already made adjustments in our laws and in our daily
lives. We are taking new measures to investigate terror
and to protect against threats.
The leaders of all nations must now carefully
consider their responsibilities and their future. Terrorist
groups such as Al Qaeda depend upon the aid or
indifference of Governments. They need the support of
a financial infrastructure and safe havens to train and
plan and hide.
Some nations want to play their part in the fight
against terror but tell us they lack the means to enforce
their laws and control their borders. We stand ready to
help.
Some Governments still turn a blind eye to the
terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by. They are
mistaken.
And some Governments, while pledging to
uphold the principles of the United Nations, have cast
their lot with the terrorists. They support them and
harbour them. And they will find that their welcomed
guests are parasites that will weaken them and
eventually consume them. For every regime that
sponsors terror there is a price to be paid, and it will be
paid. The allies of terror are equally guilty of murder
and equally accountable to justice.
The Taliban are now learning that lesson. That
regime and the terrorists who support it are now
virtually indistinguishable. Together they promote
9

terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on the
Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabul’s soccer
stadium. They can be beaten for wearing socks that are
too thin. Men are jailed for missing prayer meetings.
The United States, supported by many nations, is
bringing justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We are
making progress against military targets — and that is
our objective. Unlike the enemy, we seek to minimize,
not maximize, the loss of innocent life. I am proud of
the honourable conduct of the American military. And
my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban
have brought upon Afghanistan, including the terrible
burden of war.
The Afghan people do not deserve their present
rulers. Years of Taliban misrule have brought nothing
but misery and starvation. Even before this current
crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the
United States and other nations, and millions of
Afghans were refugees from Taliban oppression.
I make this promise to all the victims of that
regime: the Taliban’s days of harbouring terrorists, and
dealing in heroin, and brutalizing women are drawing
to a close. When that regime is gone, the people of
Afghanistan will say, with the rest of the world, good
riddance.
I can promise, too, that America will join the
world in helping the people of Afghanistan rebuild
their country.
Many nations, including mine, are sending food
and medicine to help Afghans through the winter.
America has airdropped over 1.3 million packages of
rations in Afghanistan. Just this week, we airlifted
20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into
the region. We continue to provide humanitarian aid,
even while the Taliban try to steal the food we send.
More help, eventually, will be needed. The
United States will work closely with the United
Nations and development banks to reconstruct
Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the
Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States
will work with the United Nations to support a post-
Taliban Government that represents all of the Afghan
people.
In this war of terror, each of us must answer for
what we have done or what we have left undone. After
tragedy, there is a time for sympathy and condolence.
My country has been very grateful for both.
The memorials and vigils around the world will
not be forgotten. But the time for sympathy has now
passed. The time for action has now arrived.
The most basic obligations in this new conflict
have already been defined by the United Nations. On
28 September, the Security Council adopted resolution
1373 (2001). Its requirements are clear: every
United Nations Member has a responsibility to crack
down on terrorist financing. We must pass all necessary
laws in our own countries to allow the confiscation of
terrorist assets. We must apply those laws to every
financial institution in every nation.
We have a responsibility to share intelligence and
coordinate the efforts of law enforcement. If you know
something, tell us. If we know something, we will tell
you. And when we find the terrorists, we must work
together to bring them to justice.
We have a responsibility to deny any sanctuary,
safe haven, or transit to terrorists. Every known
terrorist camp must be shut down, its operators
apprehended, and evidence of their arrest presented to
the United Nations.
We have a responsibility to deny weapons to
terrorists — and to actively prevent private citizens
from providing them.
These obligations are urgent, and they are binding
on every nation with a place in this Hall. Many
Governments are taking these obligations seriously,
and my country appreciates it. Yet even beyond
resolution 1373 (2001), more is required — and more
is expected — of our coalition against terror. We are
asking for a comprehensive commitment to this fight.
We must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just
some of them. In this world, there are good causes and
bad causes, and we may disagree on where that line is
drawn. Yet there is no such thing as a good terrorist.
No national aspiration, no remembered wrong, can ever
justify the deliberate murder of the innocent. Any
Government that rejects this principle — trying to pick
and choose its terrorist friends — will know the
consequences.
We must speak the truth about terror. Let us never
tolerate outrageous conspiracy theories concerning the
attacks of 11 September — malicious lies that attempt
to shift the blame away from the terrorists themselves,
away from the guilty. To inflame ethnic hatred is to
advance the cause of terror.
10

The war against terror must not serve as an
excuse to persecute ethnic and religious minorities in
any country. Innocent people must be allowed to live
their own lives, by their own customs, under their own
religion. And every nation must have avenues for the
peaceful expression of opinion and dissent. When these
avenues are closed, the temptation to speak through
violence grows.
We must press on with our agenda for peace and
prosperity in every land. My country is pledged to
encouraging development and expanding trade. My
country is pledged to investing in education and
combating AIDS and other infectious diseases around
the world. Following 11 September, these pledges are
even more important. In our struggle against hateful
groups that exploit poverty and despair, we must offer
an alternative of opportunity and hope.
The American Government also stands by its
commitment to a just peace in the Middle East. We are
working towards a day when two States — Israel and
Palestine — live peacefully together, within secure and
recognized borders, as called for by the Security
Council resolutions. We will do all in our power to
bring both parties back into negotiations. But peace
will come only when all have sworn off — forever —
incitement, violence and terror.
Finally, this struggle is a defining moment for the
United Nations itself — and the world needs its
principled leadership. It undermines the credibility of
this great institution, for example, when the
Commission on Human Rights offers seats to some of
the world’s most persistent violators of human rights.
The United Nations depends, above all, on its moral
authority — and that authority must be preserved.
The steps I have described will not be easy. For
all nations, they will require effort. For some nations,
they will require great courage. Yet the cost of inaction
is far greater. The only alternative to victory is a
nightmare world where every city is a potential killing
field.
As I told the American people, freedom and fear
are at war. We face enemies that hate not our policies,
but our existence — the tolerance of openness and the
creative culture that define us. But the outcome of this
conflict is certain.
There is a current in history, and it runs towards
freedom. Our enemies resent it and dismiss it, but the
dreams of mankind are defined by liberty — the natural
right to create, and build, and worship, and live in
dignity. When men and women are released from
oppression and isolation, they find fulfilment and hope,
and they leave poverty by the millions. These
aspirations are lifting up the peoples of Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas, and they can lift up all of the
Islamic world. We stand for the permanent hopes of
humanity, and those hopes will not be denied.
We are confident, too, that history has an author,
who fills time and eternity with his purpose. We know
that evil is real, but good will prevail against it. This is
the teaching of many faiths. And in that assurance, we
gain strength for a long journey.
It is our task — the task of this generation — to
provide the response to aggression and terror. We have
no other choice, because there is no other peace. We
did not ask for this mission, yet there is honour in
history’s call. We have a chance to write the story of
our times — a story of courage defeating cruelty, and
light overcoming darkness. This calling is worthy of
any life, and worthy of every nation. So let us go
forward — confident, determined and unafraid.



